# Containers

- A container is a place where we store our objects. There are different categories of containers. Here, we mention the two:
	- Sequential containers
	- Associative containers

- ***Sequential containers*** store objects in a sequence, one next to the other in memory.
## std::vector

- A vector is a container defined in the `<vector>` header. 
- A vector is a sequence of contiguous elements. Of what type, we may ask? Of any non-const type. 
- A vector and all other containers are implemented as class templates allowing for storage of (almost) any type.

- To define a `vector`, we use the following: `std::vector<some_type>` 
- Here’s a simple example of initializing a `vector` of five integers:
```cpp
#include <vector>

int main(){
	std::vector<int> v = { 1, 2, 3, 4, 5 };
}
```

- A `vector` can grow and shrink itself as we insert and delete elements into and from a vector. 
- To insert an element at the end of the vector, we use the vector’s `.push_back()` member function.
- We can think of the `push_back` function as the `insert_at_the_end` functionality.
- Vector elements are indexed. The first element has an index of `0`. Individual elements can be accessed via the subscript operator [element_index] or a member function `at(element_index)`.
- The vector’s size (number of elements inside a vector) can be obtained through a `.size()` member function.

- We said a vector is a sequential container. It stores elements in a sequence, one next to the other in memory.

- So, which one to use? When in doubt, use a `std::vector`. Each of these containers has different insertions and lookup times, each serving a different purpose. Nevertheless, as far as sequence containers go, the `std::vector` is the container we want to be using most of the time.
## std::array

- The `std::array` is a thin wrapper around a C-style raw array. Raw arrays get converted to pointers when used as function arguments (decay to a pointer), and we should prefer the `std::array` wrapper to old C-style arrays.
-  The `std::array` is of the following signature:
```cpp
std::array<type_name, array_size>;
```

- Here’s a simple example:
```cpp
#include <iostream>
#include <array>

int main(){
	std::array<int, 5> arr = { 1, 2, 3, 4, 5 };

for (auto el : arr){
	std::cout << el << '\n';
	}
}
```
## std::set

- A set is a container that holds unique, sorted objects. 
- It is a binary tree of sorted objects. 
- To use a set, we must include the `<set>` header. 
- To define a set, we use the following syntax
```cpp
std::set<type> set_name
```

- To initialize a set of five integers, we can write
```cpp
#include <iostream>
#include <set>

int main(){
	std::set<int> myset = { 1, 2, 3, 4, 5 };

	for (auto el : myset){
		std::cout << el << '\n';
	}
}
```

- We use the set’s `.insert(value)` member function to insert an element into a set.
- Since the set holds unique values, the attempt to insert duplicate values will not succeed.
## std::map

- A map is an associative container that holds key-value pairs. Keys are sorted and unique.
- A map is also implemented as a balanced binary tree/graph. So now, instead of one value per element, we have two.
- To use a map, we need to include the `<map>` header.
- - To define a map, we use the following syntax:
```cpp
std::map<type1, type2> map_name
```

- Here, type1 represents the type of the key, and type2 represents the type of a value.

- To initialize a map of `int char` pairs, for example, we can write
```cpp
#include <map>
int main()
{
std::map<int, char> mymap = { {1, 'a'}, {2, 'b'}, {3,'w'} };
}
```

- In this example, integers are keys, and the characters are the values. Every map element is a pair. The pair’s first element (the key) is accessed through a `.first` member variable, and the second element (the value) is accessed through a `.second` member variable.
- To print out our map, we can use
```cpp
#include<iostream>
#include<map>

int main(){
	std::map<int, char> mymap = { {1, 'a'}, {2, 'b'}, {3,'w'} };
	
	for (auto el : mymap){
		std::cout << el.first << ' ' << el.second << '\n';
	}
}
```

- We can also construct a map through its default constructor and some help from its key subscript operator `[]`. If the key accessed through a subscript operator does not exist, the entire key-value pair gets inserted into a map. Example:
```cpp
#include <iostream>
#include <map>

int main(){
	std::map<int, char> mymap;
	mymap[1] = 'a';
	mymap[2] = 'b';
	mymap[3] = 'w';

	for (auto el : mymap){
		std::cout << el.first << ' ' << el.second << '\n';
	}
}
```

- To insert into a map, we can use the `.insert()` member function.

- To search for a specific key inside a map, we can use the map’s `.find(key_value)` member function, which returns an iterator. If the key was not found, this function returns an iterator with a value equal to `.end()`. If the key was found, the function returns the iterator pointing at the pair containing the searched-for key:
```cpp
#include <iostream>
#include <map>

int main(){
	std::map<int, char> mymap = { {1, 'a'}, {2, 'b'}, {3,'w'} };
	auto it = mymap.find(2);
	
	if (it != mymap.end()){
		std::cout << "Found: " << it->first << " " << it->second << '\n';
	}else{
		std::cout << "Not found.";
	}
}
```

- The iterator now points at a map element. Map elements are pairs that consist of the first element – the key – and the second element, the value. To access these using an iterator, first, we must dereference an iterator using the arrow operator `->`. Then we call the pair’s first member variable for a key and second for a value.
## std::pair

- The `std::pair` class template is a wrapper that can represent a pair of values. To use the `std::pair`, we need to include the `<utility>` header.
- To access the first value in a pair, we use the `.first` member variable. To access the second value in a pair, we use the `.second` member variable. 
- Example:
```cpp
#include <iostream>
#include <utility>

int main(){
	std::pair<int, double> mypair = { 123, 3.14 };
	std::cout << "The first element is: " << mypair.first << '\n';
	std::cout << "The second element is: " << mypair.second << '\n';
}
```

- Another way to create a pair is through a `std::make_pair` function:
```cpp
#include <iostream>
#include <utility>

int main(){
	int x = 123;
	double d = 3.14;
	std::pair<int, double> mypair = std::make_pair(x, d);
	std::cout << "The first element is: " << mypair.first << '\n';
	std::cout << "The second element is: " << mypair.second << '\n';
}
```
## Other Containers

- Other sequential containers are
	- `std::list` – A doubly linked list
	- `std::forward_list` – A singly linked list
	- `std::deque` – A double-ended queue - A double-ended container that allows insertion and deletion at both ends.