# Algorithms and Utilities

- The C++ Standard Library provides a set of useful functions located in the `<algorithm>` header. These functions allow us to perform various operations on our containers.
## std::sort

- For example, if we want to sort our container, we can use the `std::sort` function.
- The `std::sort` function sorts a range of elements. It accepts arguments representing the start and the end of the range (one past the end of the range, to be exact).
- To sort a container in descending order, we pass in an additional argument called a ***comparator***. There is a built-in comparator called `std::greater`, which does the comparisons using the operator `>` and allows the `std::sort` function to sort the data in ascending order. 
- For Example:
```cpp
#include <iostream>
#include <vector>
#include <algorithm>
#include <functional>

int main(){
	std::vector<int> v = { 1, 5, 2, 15, 3, 10 };
	std::sort(v.begin(), v.end(), std::greater<int>());

	for (auto el : v){
		std::cout << el << '\n';
	}
}
```

- A comparator or a comparison function is a so-called ***function object*** defined inside the `<functional>` header. We can define our custom function object via the so-called unnamed functions called ***lambda functions*** or ***lambdas***.
- The third parameter of the `std::sort` function is often called a ***predicate***. A predicate is a function or a function object returning true or false. Standard library functions such as the `std::sort` accept predicates as one of their arguments.
## std::find

- To find a certain element by value and return an iterator pointing at that element, we use the `std::find function.
- If the value is not found, the function returns a `.end()` iterator.
- Instead of using the container’s `.begin()` and `.end()` member functions, we can also use freestanding `std::begin(container_name)` and `std::end(container_name)` functions.
- There is also a conditional `std::find_if` function which accepts a predicate. Depending on the predicate value, the function performs a search on elements for which the predicate returns true.
## std::copy

- The `std::copy` function copies the elements from one container to another. It can copy a range of elements marked with `(starting_position_iterator, ending_position_iterator)` from the starting container to a specific position marked with `(destination_position_iterator)` in the destination container. 
- The function is declared inside the `<algorithm>` header
## Min and Max Elements

- To find the greatest element in the container, we use the `std::max_element` function declared in the `<algorithm>` header. This function returns an iterator to the max element in the container.
- Similarly, to find the smallest element in the container, we use the `std::min_element` function, which returns an iterator to the min element in the container or a range.