# Lambda Expressions

- Lambda expressions, or ***lambdas*** for short, are the so-called anonymous ***function objects.*** A function object.

- A function object, or a functor, is an object of a class that can be called as a function. To be able to call an object like a function, we must overload the function call operator `()` for our class.
- The function object can have one or more parameters.
- The function object can also return a value.

- It is said that function objects carry their values. Since they are objects of a class, they can have data members they carry with them. This separates them from regular functions.

- As we can see, overloading the operator `()` and writing the entire class can be cumbersome if we only want a simple function object. That is where the lambda expressions come into play. Lambda expressions are anonymous/unnamed function objects. The lambda expression signature is
```cpp
[captures](parameters){lambda_body};
```

- To be able to use the variables in the scope in which the lambda was defined, we need to capture them first. The capture section marked by `[]` can capture local variables by copy.
- Another way to capture variables is by reference, where we use the `[&name]` notation.
- To capture more than one variable, we use the comma operator in the capture list: `[var1, var2]`
- Lambdas can have optional parameters inside the parentheses: `[](param1, param2) {}`.

- Lambdas are most often used as predicates inside the standard library algorithm functions. For example, if we want to count the number of even elements in the container, we would supply a lambda to a `std::count_if` function.
