# 1. The Key

- Max inherited his mother’s clean-living values, eschewing red meat, cigarettes, and alcohol and drugs, except for an ill-fated experiment with chewing tobacco. From his father, Max acquired a deep passion for computers. He grew up surrounded by exotic machines, from giant business computers that could double as an office desk to the first suitcase-sized “portable” IBM compatibles. Max was allowed to play with them freely. ***He started programming in BASIC at the age of eight.***

- The divorce devastated the teenager and seemed to reduce him to two modes of operation: relaxed, and full-bore insane. When his manic side flared, the world was too slow to keep up; ***his brain moved at light speed and focused like a laser on whatever task was before him.***

- Max scoffed at the curriculum, and while instructors droned on about history or sketched equations on the blackboard, Max would sit at his desk thumbing through computer printouts from dial-up bulletin board systems and the pre-Web Internet. His favourite read was an online hacker newsletter called Phrack, a product of the late-1980s hacking scene. In its plain, unadorned text, Max could follow the exploits of editors Taran King and Knight Lightning, and contributors like Phone Phanatic, Crimson Death, and Sir Hackalot. 

- The first generation to come of age in the home computing era was tasting the power at its fingertips, and Phrack was a jolt of subversive, electric information from a world far beyond Meridian’s sleepy borders. A typical issue was packed with tutorials on packet-switched networks like Telenet and Tymnet, guides to telephone-company computers like COSMOS, and inside looks at large-scale operating systems powering mainframe and mini-computers in air-conditioned equipment rooms around the globe. 

- Phrack also diligently tracked news reports from the frontier battleground between hackers and their opponents in state and federal law enforcement, who were just beginning to meet the challenges posed by recreational hackers. In July 1989, a Cornell graduate student named Robert T. Morris Jr. was charged under a brand-new federal computer crime law after he launched the first Internet worm – a virus that spread to six thousand computers, clogging network bandwidth and dragging systems to a halt. The same year, in California, a young Kevin Mitnick picked up his second hacking arrest and received one year in prison – a startlingly harsh sentence at the time. 

- Max’s first criminal conviction was a minor one. But the ***impulsiveness*** and ***mischievousness*** that spawned it ran deep in Max’s personality. ***And he was destined to hold a lot more master keys.***