# 22. Enemies

- Jonathan Giannone was learning that loss of privacy was the cost of doing business with Iceman.

- He’d been working with the mystery hacker for over a year – mostly acquiring servers that Iceman used in his vulnerability scanning – and he was still constantly under Iceman’s electronic scrutiny. One day, the hacker sent Giannone a link purporting to be a CNN article about computer problems at JetBlue, the airline that had rebuffed Giannone’s long-ago extortion attempt. Giannone clicked on the link without thinking, and, just like that, Iceman was on his computer again. Client-side attacks for the win. 

- Giannone began routinely checking his computer for malware but couldn’t keep up with Iceman’s intrusions. Max got ahold of Giannone’s United Airlines Mileage Plus password and began tracking his movements around the world – Giannone was a serious air travel aficionado who’d sometimes fly just to accumulate miles. When he’d land at San Francisco International, he’d find a text message from Iceman waiting for him on his cell. “Why are you in San Francisco?” 

- It might have been amusing if it weren’t for Iceman’s frightening mood swings. He could turn on you in a minute – one day you’d be his best friend, his “number one guy”; the next he’d be convinced you were a snitch, a ripper, or worse.

- On an earlier occasion, in September 2004, Giannone told Iceman he was about to fly out to visit Chris, and ***Max remarked cryptically that he could prevent the trip if he wanted to.*** Giannone laughed. But an hour and a half into his flight, the plane suddenly turned around and headed for Chicago. As the airliner set down at O’Hare, the captain explained that the Los Angeles air traffic control center had gone dark, necessitating the change in itinerary.

- It turned out a computer error was responsible. There was a known bug in the Windows-based radio control system at the Los Angeles Air Route Traffic Control Center in Palmdale, which required technicians to reboot the machine every 49.7 days. They’d missed a reboot, and a backup system had failed at the same time. The outage resulted in hundreds of flights being grounded and five incidents of airplanes drifting closer to each other than safety regulations permit. No foul play was discovered, but years later, ***when the full range of Max Vision’s powers became clear, Giannone would find himself wondering if Iceman hadn’t cracked the FAA’s computers and crippled Los Angeles, just to stop him from going clubbing with Chris.***

- Giannone finally took radical measures to try to keep Iceman out of his stuff: He bought an Apple. ***Iceman could penetrate just about anything. But Giannone was pretty sure he couldn’t hack Macs.***