# 26. What’s in Your Wallet

- Max’s hostile takeover was about fixing the community, not personal profit.
-  Chris had been trying to drive Max into pulling one big score, something that would catapult them both out of the crime business for good and maybe fund a new legitimate start-up.
- The Russian exploit was already detected by antivirus software, so he modified it to change its signature, running it through his antivirus lab to verify that it was now undetectable.
- The only thing left was the social engineering: Max had to trick his targets into visiting a website loaded with the exploit code. Max decided on the domain name Financialedgenews.com, and set up hosting at ValueWeb.
- Each copy of the message was customized, so every employee would think he or she was mentioned by name in the notional Financial Edge article. At Capital One, 500 employees got the message, from executives to PR spokespeople and IT workers. About 125 of them clicked on the poisoned link and were sent to a page loaded with generic finance industry news. While they puzzled over the page, a hidden payload zipped through the corporate firewall and onto their machines.
- The software opened a back door that would allow Max to slip in at his leisure and scour the victims’ hard drives for sensitive data, sniff the banks’ internal networks, steal passwords. It wasn’t much different from what he’d done to thousands of Defense Department computers a lifetime ago. Back when it was all just fun and games.