# 27. Chapter 27

- It wasn’t a surprising discovery. SQL injection vulnerabilities are the Web’s most persistent weakness.
- SQL injection has to do with the behind-the-scenes architecture of most sophisticated websites. When you visit a website with dynamic content - news articles, blog posts, stock quotes, virtual shopping carts - the site’s software is pulling the content in raw form from a back-end database, usually running on a completely different computer than the host to which you’ve connected. The website is a facade - the database server is the important part, and it’s locked down. Ideally, it won’t even be accessible from the Internet.
- The website’s software speaks to the database server in a standard syntax called Structured Query Language, or SQL (pronounced “sequel”). The SQL command SELECT, for example, asks the database server for all the information that fits a specified criteria. INSERT puts new information in the database. The rarely used DROP instruction will mass-delete data.
- It’s a potentially perilous arrangement, because there are any number of situations where the software has to send a visitor’s input as part of an SQL command - in a search query, for example. If a visitor to a music site enters “Sinatra” in the search box, the website’s software will ask the database to look for matches.
- An SQL injection vulnerability occurs when the software doesn’t properly sanitize the user’s input before including it in a database command. Punctuation is the real killer. If a user in the above scenario searches on “Sinatra’; DROP music_catalog;” it’s tremendously important that the apostrophe and semicolons not make it through. Otherwise, the database server sees this.

```sql
SELECT * FROM music_catalog
WHERE artist = ‘Sinatra’; DROP music_catalog;’;
```

- As far as the database is concerned, that’s two commands in succession, separated by a semicolon. The first command finds Frank Sinatra albums, the second one “drops” the music catalog, destroying it.

- SQL injection is a standard weapon in every hacker’s arsenal - the holes, even today, plague websites of all stripes, including e-commerce and banking sites. And in 2005, the forum software used by TalkCash and ScandinavianCarding was a soft target.

- To exploit the bug on TalkCash, Max registered for a new account and posted a seemingly innocuous message on one of the discussion threads. His SQL attack was hidden in the body of the message, the font color set to match the background so nobody would see it.

- He ran a search query designed to find the post, and the buggy forum software passed his command to the database system, which executed it, INSERTing a new administrator account just for Max. A similar attack worked at ScandinavianCarding.

- On August 14, Max was ready to show the carding world what he was capable of. He slid into the sites through the holes he’d secretly blasted in their ramparts, using his illicit admin access to copy their databases. The plan would have made Sun Tzu proud: Attacking and absorbing rival forums was an unexpected route indeed. Most carders wanted to avoid attention, not thrust themselves into prominence. A hostile takeover was unprecedented.

- When he was done, he executed the DROP command on all the sites’ databases, wiping them out. ScandinavianCarding, the Vouched, TalkCash, DarkMarket, Cardingworld—the bustling, twenty-four-hour-a-day marketplaces supporting a billion-dollar global underground economy all winked out of existence. 
- They would all know the name “Iceman.”