# 33. Exit Strategy

- It was time, he decided, for Max Vision, white hat, to return. It would be official. He visited the San Francisco courthouse and filled out the necessary paperwork. On August 14, ***a judge approved his legal name change from Max Butler to Max Ray Vision.***

- He already had an idea for a new website that could catapult him back into the white-hat scene: a system for disclosing and managing zero-day vulnerabilities. He could seed it with the security holes he was privy to in the underground, bringing the exploits into the white-hat world like a defector crossing Checkpoint Charlie with a suitcase full of state secrets.

- Max had stopped hacking, but he was still disentwining himself from his double life - after five years, he had a lot of relationships and ventures that he couldn’t just sever overnight.

- “Put your hands where I can see them!” an agent yelled. “Lay down!” The agent was positioned between Max and his computers. Max had often thought that, in a raid, he might be able to pull the plug on his server, making his already formidable cyberdefenses completely bulletproof. Now that it was really happening, he realized that diving for his machines wasn’t an option, unless he wanted to be shot.
- Max recovered his composure. Unplugged or not, his machines were locked down, and ***his encryption was rock solid.*** He managed to relax a little as the agents let him get dressed, then walked him down the hall in handcuffs.
- On the way, they passed a three-man team who’d been waiting for the Secret Service to secure the safe house. They weren’t feds; they were from Carnegie Mellon University’s Computer Emergency Response Team, ***and they were there to bust Max’s crypto.***

- It was the first time CERT had been invited to a raid - ***but the circumstances were special.*** Chris Aragon had employed the same ***DriveCrypt whole-disk-encryption software that Max used, and neither the Secret Service nor CERT had been able to recover anything from the drive.*** 
- ***Full-disk encryption keeps the entire hard drive encrypted at all times: all the files, the file names, the operating system, the software, the directory structure - any clue to what the user has been doing. Without the decryption key, the disk might as well have been a Frisbee.***

- The key to cracking a full-disk encryption program is to get at it while it’s still running on the computer. At that point, the disk is still fully encrypted, but the decryption key is stored in RAM, to allow the software to decrypt and encrypt the data from the hard drive on the fly.
- The knock on Max’s door had been intended to draw Max away from his machines; if he’d shut them down before the Secret Service got the cuffs on, there wouldn’t have been much CERT could do - the contents of the RAM would have evaporated. But Max had been caught napping, and his servers were still running.

- CERT had spent the last two weeks gaming out different scenarios for what they might encounter in Max’s safe house. Now the team leader looked over the setup: Max’s server was wired to half a dozen hard drives. Two had lost power when an agent tripped over an electrical cable snaking across the floor, but the server itself was still running, and that was what mattered.

-  The forensics experts moved to the machines and began their work, using memory-acquisition software they’d brought with them to suck down the live data from the RAM onto an external storage device.

- Max was speechless. He never hated the Secret Service, or the FBI, or even the informants on Carders Market. ***Iceman did. But Iceman was never real; he was a guise, a personality Max slipped on like a suit when he was in cyberspace. Max Vision never hated anyone in his life.***