# 6. I Miss Crime

- The month after the BIND attack had been a busy time for Max. He launched Whitehats.com, and it was an instant success in the security world. In addition to housing his scanning tool, the site collected the latest CERT advisories and links to BIND software patches, as well as a paper Max had written dissecting the ADM worm with the clarity and the discerning eye of a connoisseur. Nobody in the community suspected that Max Vision, the rising star behind Whitehats.com, had personally provided the brightest example of the seriousness of the BIND security hole.

- Max had convinced himself he was doing something positive for the Internet, so he hadn’t done much to cover his tracks.

-  But this assignment smelled like snitching. Personal loyalty was written deep into Max’s firmware, and one look at the Def Con crowd told him these were his people.
- Many of the hackers were reluctantly giving up childish things, migrating into legitimate dot-com jobs or starting security companies. They were becoming white hats, like Max. A popular T-shirt at the conference summed up the mood: I MISS CRIME.

- “Just say no! There’s never any good reason to talk to a cop... If you’re going to cooperate, you’re going to cooperate after consulting with a lawyer and cutting a deal. There’s never any reason to give them information for free.”
- In the back of the room, Kimi prodded Max in the ribs with her elbow. Everything Granick was advising computer intruders not to do, Max had done. Everything. Max was having second thoughts about his arrangement with the feds.