# 7. Max Vision

- The BIND vulnerability and the resultant success of Whitehats.com had given him a running start. Now Max hung up his own shingle as a computer security consultant, erecting a new website touting his services as a hacker for hire at one hundred dollars an hour - or free to nonprofit groups. His chief selling point: a 100 percent success rate in penetration tests. He had never once confronted a network he couldn’t crack.

- It was an exciting time to be a white hat. The rebellious spirit that drove the open-source software movement was planting itself in the computer security world, and a new crop of college graduates, dropouts, and former and current black hats was upending the conservative assumptions that had dominated security thinking for decades.

- First to be dustbinned was the tenet that security holes and attack methods should be kept quiet, held privately among a cadre of trusted responsible adults. The white hats called this notion “security through obscurity.” The new generation preferred “full disclosure.” Discussing security problems widely not only helped get them fixed, but it also advanced the science of security, and hacking, as a whole. Keeping bugs private only benefited two groups: the bad guys who were exploiting them, and vendors like Microsoft that preferred to fix security holes without confessing the details of their screwups.

- The full-disclosure movement spawned the Bugtraq mailing list, where hackers of any hat color were encouraged to send in detailed reports of security flaws they’d found in software. If they could provide an “exploit” - code that demonstrated the flaw - so much the better. The preferred path to full disclosure was to first notify the software maker and give that company time to issue a patch before releasing the flaw or exploit on Bugtraq. But Bugtraq didn’t censor, and it was common for a bug finder to drop a previously unknown exploit onto the list, releasing it simultaneously to thousands of security researchers and hackers in the span of minutes. The maneuver was all but guaranteed to kick a software company into rapid response.

- Bugtraq provided hackers with a way to show off their expertise without breaking the law. The ones who were still cracking systems had an invigorated white-hat community to deal with, armed with a growing arsenal of defensive tools.

- In late 1998, a former NSA cybersecurity contractor named Marty Roesch developed one of the best. Roesch thought it would be fun to see what random attacks were crossing his home cable modem connection while he was at work. As a weekend project, he cranked out a packet sniffer called ***Snort*** and released it as an open-source project.

- At first, Snort was nothing special - a packet sniffer is a common security tool that eavesdrops on the traffic crossing a network and dumps it to a file for analysis. But a month later, Roesch turned his program into a full-blown intrusion detection system (IDS), which would alert the operator whenever it spotted network traffic that matched the signature of a known attack. There were a number of proprietary IDSs on the market, but Snort’s versatility and open-source licensing instantly appealed to the white hats, who loved nothing more than tinkering with a new security tool. Volunteer programmers jumped in to add functionality to the program.

- Max was excited by Snort. The software was similar to BRO, the Lawrence Berkeley lab project that had helped sniff out Max’s BIND attack, and Max knew it could be a game changer for online security. Now white hats could watch in real time for anyone trying to exploit the vulnerabilities discussed on Bugtraq and elsewhere. Snort was like an early-warning system for a network. All it was lacking was a comprehensive and up-to-date list of attack signatures, so the software would know what to look for.

- In the first few months after Snort’s release, a disorganized trickle of user-created signatures put the total number at about 200. In a single sleepless night, Max more than doubled the count, whipping up 490 signatures. Some were original, others were improved versions of the existing rules or ports from Dragon IDS, a popular proprietary system. Writing a rule meant identifying unique characteristics in the network traffic produced by a particular attack, like the port number or a string of bytes.

- Max put the signatures online as a single file on Whitehats.com, crediting a handful of other security geeks for their contributions. Later, he converted the file to a full-fledged database and invited other experts to contribute their own rules. He gave the project the catchy name arachNIDS, for Advanced Reference Archive of Current Heuristics for Network Intrusion Detection Systems.

- ArachNIDS was a hit and helped Snort surge to new levels of popularity in the security community, with Max Vision riding the swell to security stardom. As more white hats contributed to the project, it became the computer-security equivalent of the FBI’s fingerprint database, capable of identifying virtually every known attack technique and variant.

- In 1999, Max injected himself into another promising venture aimed directly at tricking black-hat hackers. The Honeynet Project, as it would later be called, was the work of a former Army officer who applied his interest in military tactics to erect network “honeypots” - decoy computers that served no purpose but to be hacked. The Honeynet Project would secretly wire a packet sniffer to the system and place it unprotected on the Internet.

- When a hacker targeted a honeypot, his every move would be recorded and then analyzed by security experts, with the results released to the world in the spirit of full disclosure. Max delved into the forensic work, reconstructing crimes from raw packet data and producing cogent analyses that blew the lid off some of the underground’s concealed techniques.