# 1. Structure

## How Pages use Structure

- Think about the stories you read in a newspaper: for each story, there will be a headline, some text, and possibly some images. If the article is a long piece, there may be subheadings that split the story into separate sections or quotes from those involved. Structure helps readers understand the stories in the newspaper.
## Structuring Word Documents

- The use of headings and subheadings in any document often reflects a hierarchy of information.
## HTML Describes the Structure of Pages

---
- Example :

```html
<html>
<body>
		 <h1>This is the Main Heading</h1>
		 <p>This text might be an introduction to the rest of
			 the page. And if the page is a long one it might
			 be split up into several sub-headings.</p>
		 <h2>This is a Sub-Heading</h2>
		 <p>Many long articles have sub-headings so to help
			 you follow the structure of what is being written.
			 There may even be sub-sub-headings (or lower-level
			 headings).</p>
		 <h2>Another Sub-Heading</h2>
		 <p>Here you can see another sub-heading.</p>
</body>
</html>

```

- Result:

<html>
<body>
		 <h1>This is the Main Heading</h1>
		 <p>This text might be an introduction to the rest of
			 the page. And if the page is a long one it might
			 be split up into several sub-headings.</p>
		 <h2>This is a Sub-Heading</h2>
		 <p>Many long articles have sub-headings so to help
			 you follow the structure of what is being written.
			 There may even be sub-sub-headings (or lower-level
			 headings).</p>
		 <h2>Another Sub-Heading</h2>
		 <p>Here you can see another sub-heading.</p>
</body>
</html>

---

- The HTML code is made up of characters that live inside angled brackets - these are called HTML ***elements***.
- Elements are usually made up of two ***tags***: an opening tag and a closing tag. (The closing tag has an extra forward slash in it.)
- Each HTML element tells the browser something about the information that sits between its opening and closing tags.
## HTML uses Elements to describe the structure of pages

## Attributes tell us more about elements

- Attributes provide additional information about the contents of an element. 
- They appear on the opening tag of the element and are made up of two parts: a ***name*** and a ***value***, separated by an equals sign.

---
- Example:

```html
<p lang="en-us">Paragraph in English</p>
```

- Result:

<p lang="en-us">Paragraph in English</p>

---

- The attribute ***name*** indicates what kind of extra information you are supplying about the element's content. It should be written in lowercase.
- The ***value*** is the information or setting for the attribute. It should be placed in double quotes. Different attributes can have different values.
## Body, Head, & Title

`<body>`
- Everything inside this element is shown inside the main browser window.

`<head>`
- This contains information about the page. 
- You will usually find a `<title>` element inside the `<head>` element.

`<title>`
- Anything written between the `<title>` tags will appear in the title bar (or tabs) at the top of the browser window.
## Looking at how other sites are built

- When the web was first taking off, one of the most common ways to learn about HTML and discover new tips and techniques was to look at the source code that made up web pages.
- These days there are many more books and online tutorials that teach HTML, but you can still look at the code that a web server sends to you.