# 2. Text

## Headings

- HTML has six "levels" of headings
`<h1>`
`<h2>`
`<h3>`
`<h4>`
`<h5>`
`<h6>`
## Paragraphs

`<p>`
- To create a paragraph, surround the words that make up the paragraph with an opening `<p>` tag and closing `</p>` tag.
## Bold and Italic

`<b>`
- By enclosing words in the tags `<b>` and `</b>` we can make characters appear ***bold***.
`<i>`
- By enclosing words in the tags `<i>` and `</i>` we can make characters appear italic.
## Superscript and Subscript

`sup>`
- The `<sup>` element is used to contain characters that should be superscript such as the suffixes of dates or mathematical concepts like raising a number to a power.

`<sub>`
- The `<sub>` element is used to contain characters that should be subscript. It is commonly used with foot notes or chemical formulas.

---
- Example:

```html
<p>On the 4<sup>th</sup> of September you will learn about E=MC<sup>2</sup>.</p>

<p>The amount of CO<sub>2</sub> in the atmosphere grew by 2ppm in 2009<sub>1</sub>.</p>
```

- Result:

<p>On the 4<sup>th</sup> of September you will learn
about E=MC<sup>2</sup>.</p>
<p>The amount of CO<sub>2</sub> in the atmosphere
grew by 2ppm in 2009<sub>1</sub>.</p>

---
## Whitespace

- In order to make code easier to read, web page authors often add extra spaces or start some elements on new lines.
- When the browser comes across two or more spaces next to each other, it only displays one space.

- Similarly if it comes across a line break, it treats that as a single space too. This is known as ***white space collapsing.***
## Horizontal Rules

`<br />`
- The browser will automatically show each new paragraph or heading on a new line. But if you wanted to add a line break inside the middle of a paragraph you can use the line break tag `<br />`.

`<hr />`
-  You can add a horizontal rule between sections using the `<hr />` tag.

<hr />

- There are a few elements that do not have any words between an opening and closing tag. They are known as ***empty elements*** and they are written differently.
- An empty element usually has only one tag. Before the closing angled bracket of an empty element there will often be a space and a forward slash character. Some web page authors miss this out but it is good habit to get into.
## Semantic Markup

- There are some text elements that are not intended to affect the structure of your web pages, but they do add extra information to the pages - they are known as ***semantic markup***.

- Browsers often display the contents of these elements in a different way.
- You should not use them to change the way that your text looks; their purpose is to describe the content of your web pages more accurately.

- The reason for using these elements is that other programs, such as screen readers or search engines, can use this extra information. For example, the voice of a screen reader may add emphasis to the words inside the `<em>` element, or a search engine might register that your page features a quote if you use the `<blockquote>` element.
## Strong & Emphasis

`<strong>`
- The use of the `<strong>` element indicates that its content has strong importance.
-  By default, browsers will show the contents of a `<strong>` element in bold.

---
- Example:

```html
<p><strong>Beware:</strong> Pickpockets operate in this area.</p>
<p>This toy has many small pieces and is <strong>not suitable for children under five years old. </strong></p>
```

- Result:

<p><strong>Beware:</strong> Pickpockets operate in this area.</p>
<p>This toy has many small pieces and is <strong>not suitable for children under five years old. </strong></p>

----
`<em>`
- The `<em>` element indicates emphasis that subtly changes the meaning of a sentence.
- By default browsers will show the contents of an `<em>` element in italic.
## Quotations

- There are two elements commonly used for marking up quotations:
`<blockquote>`
- The `<blockquote>` element is used for longer quotes that take up an entire paragraph. Note how the `<p>` element is still used inside the `<blockquote>` element.

---
- Example:

```html
<blockquote cite="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/
Winnie-the-Pooh">
<p>Did you ever stop to think, and forget to start
		 again?</p>
</blockquote>
```

- Result:
 
<blockquote cite="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/
Winnie-the-Pooh">
<p>Did you ever stop to think, and forget to start
		 again?</p>
</blockquote>

---

- Browsers tend to indent the contents of the `<blockquote>` element, however you should not use this element just to indent a piece of text - rather you should achieve this effect using CSS.

`<q>`
- The `<q>` element is used for shorter quotes that sit within a paragraph. Browsers are supposed to put quotes around the `<q>` element, however Internet Explorer does not - therefore many people avoid using the `<q>` element.

---
- Example:

```html
<p>As A.A. Milne said, <q>Some people talk to animals. Not many listen though. That's the problem.</q></p>
```

- Result:

<p>As A.A. Milne said, <q>Some people talk to animals. Not many listen though. That's the problem.</q></p>

---

- Both elements may use the cite attribute to indicate where the quote is from. Its value should be a URL that will have more information about the source of the quotation.
## Abbreviations & Acronyms

`<abbr>`
- If you use an ***abbreviation*** or an ***acronym***, then the `<abbr>` element can be used. A ***title*** attribute on the opening tag is used to specify the full term.
- In HTML 4 there was a separate `<acronym>` element for acronyms. To spell out the full form of the acronym, the title attribute was used (as with the `<abbr>` element above).
- HTML5 just uses the `<abbr>` element for both abbreviations and acronyms.

---
- Example:

```html
<p><abbr title="Professor">Prof</abbr> Stephen Hawking is a theoretical physicist and cosmologist.</p>

<p><acronym title="National Aeronautics and Space Administration">NASA</acronym> do some crazy space stuff.</p>
```

- Result:

<p><abbr title="Professor">Prof</abbr> Stephen Hawking is a theoretical physicist and cosmologist.</p>

<p><acronym title="National Aeronautics and Space Administration">NASA</acronym> do some crazy space stuff.</p>

---
## Citations & Definitions

`<cite>`
- When you are referencing a piece of work such as a book, film or research paper, the `<cite>` element can be used to indicate where the citation is from.

---
- Example:

```html
<p><cite>A Brief History of Time</cite> by Stephen Hawking has sold over ten million copies worldwide.</p>
```

- Result:

<p><cite>A Brief History of Time</cite> by Stephen Hawking has sold over ten million copies worldwide.</p>

---

- In HTML5, `<cite>` should not really be used for a person's name - but it was allowed in HTML 4, so most people are likely to continue to use it.
- Browsers will render the content of a `<cite>` element in italics.

`<dfn>`
- The first time you explain some new terminology (perhaps an academic concept or some jargon) in a document, it is known as the defining instance of it.
- The `<dfn>` element is used to indicate the defining instance of a new term.
- Some browsers show the content of the `<dfn>` element in italics. Safari and Chrome do not change its appearance.

---
- Example:

```html
<p>A <dfn>black hole</dfn> is a region of space from which nothing, not even light, can escape.</p>
```

- Result:

<p>A <dfn>black hole</dfn> is a region of space from which nothing, not even light, can escape.</p>

---
## Author Details

`<address>`
- The `<address>` element has quite a specific use: to contain contact details for the author of the page.
- It can contain a physical address, but it does not have to. For example, it may also contain a phone number or email address.
- Browsers often display the content of the `<address>` element in italics.

---
- Example:

```html
<address>
<p><a href="mailto:homer@example.org">
		 homer@example.org</a></p>
<p>742 Evergreen Terrace, Springfield.</p>
</address>
```

- Result:

<address>
<p><a href="mailto:homer@example.org">
		 homer@example.org</a></p>
<p>742 Evergreen Terrace, Springfield.</p>
</address>

---
## Changes to Content

`<ins>`
`<del>`
- The `<ins>` element can be used to show content that has been inserted into a document, while the `<del>` element can show text that has been deleted from it.

---
- Example:

```html
<p>It was the <del>worst</del> <ins>best</ins> idea she had ever had.</p>
```

- Result:

<p>It was the <del>worst</del> <ins>best</ins> idea
she had ever had.</p>

---
- The content of a `<ins>` element is usually underlined, while the content of a `<del>` element usually has a line through it.

`<s>`
- The `<s>` element indicates something that is no longer accurate or relevant (but that should not be deleted).
- Visually the content of an `<s>` element will usually be displayed with a line through the center.
- Older versions of HTML had a `<u>` element for content that was underlined, but this is being phased out.

---
- Example:

```html
<p>Laptop computer:</p>
<p><s>Was $995</s></p>
<p>Now only $375</p>
```

- Result:

<p>Laptop computer:</p>
<p><s>Was $995</s></p>
<p>Now only $375</p>

---