# 3. Lists

- ***HTML provides us with three different types of lists***:
	- ***Ordered lists*** are lists where each item in the list is numbered
	- ***Unordered lists*** are lists that begin with a bullet point (rather than characters that indicate order).
	- ***Definition lists*** are made up of a set of terms along with the definitions for each of those terms.
## Ordered Lists

`<ol>`
- The ordered list is created with the `<ol>` element.

`<li>`
- Each item in the list is placed between an opening `<li>` tag and a closing `</li>` tag. (The li stands for ***list item***.)

- Browsers indent lists by default.

- Sometimes you may see a ***type*** attribute used with the `<ol>` element to specify the type of numbering (numbers, letters, roman numerals and so on). It is better to use the CSS list-style-type property.

---
- Example:

```html
<ol>
<li>Chop potatoes into quarters</li>
<li>Simmer in salted water for 15-20
		
 minutes until tender</li>
<li>Heat milk, butter and nutmeg</li>
<li>Drain potatoes and mash</li>
<li>Mix in the milk mixture</li>
</ol>
```

- Result:

<ol>
<li>Chop potatoes into quarters</li>
<li>Simmer in salted water for 15-20
		
 minutes until tender</li>
<li>Heat milk, butter and nutmeg</li>
<li>Drain potatoes and mash</li>
<li>Mix in the milk mixture</li>
</ol>

---
## Unordered Lists

`<ul>`
- The unordered list is created with the `<ul>` element.

`<li>`
- Each item in the list is placed between an opening `<li>` tag and a closing `</li>` tag.

- Browsers indent lists by default.
- Sometimes you may see a type attribute used with the `<ul>` element to specify the type of bullet point (circles, squares, diamonds and so on). It is better to use the CSS list-style-type property.

---
- Example:

```html
<ul>
<li>1kg King Edward potatoes</li>
<li>100ml milk</li>
<li>50g salted butter</li>
<li>Freshly grated nutmeg</li>
<li>Salt and pepper to taste</li>
</ul>
```

- Result:
<ul>
<li>1kg King Edward potatoes</li>
<li>100ml milk</li>
<li>50g salted butter</li>
<li>Freshly grated nutmeg</li>
<li>Salt and pepper to taste</li>
</ul>

---
## Definition Lists

`<dl>`
- The definition list is created with the `<dl>` element and usually consists of a series of terms and their definitions.
- Inside the `<dl>` element you will usually see pairs of `<dt>` and `<dd>` elements.

`<dt>`
- This is used to contain the term being defined (the definition term).

`<dd>`
- This is used to contain the definition.
- Sometimes you might see a list where there are two terms used for the same definition or two different definitions for the same term.

---
- Example:

```html
<dl>
<dt>Sashimi</dt>
<dd>Sliced raw fish that is served with
			 condiments such as shredded daikon radish or
			 ginger root, wasabi and soy sauce</dd>
<dt>Scale</dt>
<dd>A device used to accurately measure the
			 weight of ingredients</dd>
<dd>A technique by which the scales are removed
			 from the skin of a fish</dd>
<dt>Scamorze</dt>
<dt>Scamorzo</dt>
<dd>An Italian cheese usually made from whole
			 cow's milk (although it was traditionally made
			 from buffalo milk)</dd>
</dl>
```

- Result:
<dl>
<dt>Sashimi</dt>
<dd>Sliced raw fish that is served with
			 condiments such as shredded daikon radish or
			 ginger root, wasabi and soy sauce</dd>
<dt>Scale</dt>
<dd>A device used to accurately measure the
			 weight of ingredients</dd>
<dd>A technique by which the scales are removed
			 from the skin of a fish</dd>
<dt>Scamorze</dt>
<dt>Scamorzo</dt>
<dd>An Italian cheese usually made from whole
			 cow's milk (although it was traditionally made
			 from buffalo milk)</dd>
</dl>

---
## Nested Lists

- You can put a second list inside an `<li>` element to create a sub-list or nested list.
- Browsers display nested lists indented further than the parent list.
- In nested unordered lists, the browser will usually change the style of the bullet point too.

---
- Example:

```html
<ul>
<li>Mousses</li>
<li>Pastries
		 <ul>
			 <li>Croissant</li>
			 <li>Mille-feuille</li>
			 <li>Palmier</li>
			 <li>Profiterole</li>
		 </ul>
</li>
<li>Tarts</li>
</ul>
```

- Result:
<ul>
<li>Mousses</li>
<li>Pastries
		 <ul>
			 <li>Croissant</li>
			 <li>Mille-feuille</li>
			 <li>Palmier</li>
			 <li>Profiterole</li>
		 </ul>
</li>
<li>Tarts</li>
</ul>

---
