# 6. Tables

## Basic Table Structure

`<table>`
- The `<table>` element is used to create a table. The contents of the table are written out row by row.
`<tr>`
- You indicate the start of each row using the opening `<tr>` tag. (The tr stands for ***table row***.)
- It is followed by one or more `<td>` elements (one for each cell in that row).
- At the end of the row you use a closing `</tr>` tag.
`<td>`
- Each cell of a table is represented using a `<td>` element. (The `td` stands for ***table data***.)
- At the end of each cell you use a closing `</td>` tag.

- Some browsers automatically draw lines around the table and/or the individual cells. You will learn how to control the borders of tables using CSS.
## Table Headings

`<th>`
- The `<th>` element is used just like the `<td>` element but its purpose is to represent the heading for either a column or a row. (The `th` stands for ***table heading***.)
- Even if a cell has no content, you should still use a `<td>` or `<th>` element to represent the presence of an empty cell otherwise the table will not render correctly.
- Using `<th>` elements for headings helps people who use screen readers, improves the ability for search engines to index your pages, and also enables you to control the appearance of tables better when you start to use CSS.

- You can use the `scope` attribute on the `<th>` element to indicate whether it is a heading for a ***column*** or a ***row***. It can take the values: ***row*** to indicate a heading for a row or ***col*** to indicate a heading for a column.
- Browsers usually display the content of a `<th>` element in bold and in the middle of the cell.
## Spanning Columns

- Sometimes you may need the entries in a table to stretch across more than one column.
- The colspan attribute can be used on a `<th>` or `<td>` element and indicates how many columns that cell should run across.
## Spanning Rows

- You may also need entries in a table to stretch down across more than one row.
- The rowspan attribute can be used on a `<th>` or `<td>` element to indicate how many rows a cell should span down the table.
## Long Tables

- There are three elements that help distinguish between the main content of the table and the first and last rows (which can contain different content).
- These elements help people who use screen readers and also allow you to style these sections in a different manner than the rest of the table.
`<thead>`
- The headings of the table should sit inside the `<thead>` element.
`<tbody>`
- The body should sit inside the `<tbody>` element.
`<tfoot>`
- The footer belongs inside the `<tfoot>` element.

- By default, browsers rarely treat the content of these elements any differently than other elements however designers often use CSS styles to change their appearance.
## Old Code: Width & Spacing

- There are some outdated attributes which you should not use on new websites. You may, however, come across some of them when looking at older code, so I will mention them here. All of these attributes have been replaced by the use of CSS.

- The `width` attribute was used on the opening `<table>` tag to indicate how wide that table should be and on some opening `<th>` and `<td>` tags to specify the width of individual cells. The value of this attribute is the width of the table or cell in pixels.
- The opening `<table>` tag could also use the `cellpadding` attribute to add space inside each cell of the table, and the `cellspacing` attribute to create space between each cell of the table. The values for these attributes were given in pixels.
## Old Code: Border & Background

- The `border` attribute was used on both the `<table`> and `<td>` elements to indicate the width of the border in pixels.
- The `bgcolor` attribute was used to indicate background colors of either the entire table or individual table cells. The value is usually a hex code.

- When building a new website you should use CSS to control the appearance of the table rather than these attributes. They are only covered here because you may come across them if you look at the code of older websites.