# C++14

- C++14 is an ISO C++ standard published in 2014. It brings some additions to the language and the standard library but mainly complements and fixes the C++11 standard. When we say we want to use the C++11 standard, what we actually want is the C++14 standard.
- To compile for C++14, add the `-std=c++14` flag to a command-line compilation string if using the g++ or clang compiler.
## Binary Literals

- Values are represented by literals. So far, we have mentioned three different kinds of binary literals – decimal, hexadecimal, and octal.
- C++14 standard introduces the fourth kind of integral literals called ***binary literals***. 
- Using binary literals, we can represent the value in its binary form. The literal has a ***0b*** prefix, followed by a sequence of ones and zeros representing a value.

- ***Important to remember***: Values are values; they are some sequence of bits and bytes in memory. What can be different is the value representation. There are decimal, hexadecimal, octal, and binary representations of the value. These different forms of the same thing can be relevant to us humans. To a machine, it is all bits and bytes, transistors, and electrical current.
## Digit Separators

- In C++14, we can separate digits with a single quote to make it more readable:
```cpp
int main(){
	int x =100'000'000;
}
```
- The compiler ignores the quotes. The separators are only here for our benefit, for example, to split a large number into more readable sections.
## Auto for Functions

- We can deduce the function type based on the return statement value:
```cpp
auto myintfn() // integer
{
	return 123;
}

auto mydoublefn() // double
{
	return 3.14;
}
```
## Generic Lambdas

- We can use auto parameters in lambda functions now. The type of the parameter will be deduced from the value supplied to a lambda function. This is also called a ***generic lambda***:
```cpp
#include <iostream>
int main(){
	auto mylambda = [](auto p) {std::cout << "Lambda parameter: "<< p << '\n'; };
	mylambda(123);
	mylambda(3.14);
}
```
## std::make_unique

- C++14 introduces a `std::make_unique` function for creating unique pointers. It is declared inside a `<memory>` header. Prefer this function to a raw new operator when creating unique pointers.
