# C++17

- The C++17 standard introduces new language and library features and changes some of the language rules.
## Nested Namespaces

- Remember how we said we could have nested namespaces? We can put a namespace into another namespace. We used the following nested namespace syntax:
```cpp
namespace MyNameSpace1{
	namespace MyNameSpace2{
		namespace MyNameSpace3
		{
			// some code
		}
	}
}
```

- The C++17 standard allows us to nest namespaces using the namespace resolution operator. The preceding example can now be rewritten as
```cpp
namespace MyNameSpace1::MyNameSpace2::MyNameSpace3{
	// some code
}
```
## Constexpr Lambdas

- Lambdas can now be a constant expression, meaning they can be evaluated during compile time:
```cpp
int main(){
	constexpr auto mylambda = [](int x, int y) { return x + y; };
	static_assert(mylambda(10, 20) == 30, "The lambda condition is not true.");
}
```

- An equivalent example where we put the constexpr specifier in the lambda itself would be
```cpp
int main(){
	auto mylambda = [](int x, int y) constexpr { return x + y; };
	static_assert(mylambda(10, 20) == 30, "The lambda condition is not true.");
}
```

- This was not the case in earlier C++ standards.
## Structured Bindings

- Structured binding binds the variable names to elements of compile-time known expressions, such as arrays or maps. If we want to have multiple variables taking values of expression elements, we use structured bindings. 
- The syntax is
```cpp
auto [myvar1, myvar2, myvar3] = some_expression;
```

- A simple example where we bound three variables to be aliases for three array elements would be:
```cpp
int main(){
	int arr[] = { 1, 2, 3 };
	auto [myvar1, myvar2, myvar3] = arr;
}
```

- Now we have defined three integer variables. These variables have array element values of 1, 2, and 3, respectively. These variables are copies of array elements. Making changes to variables does not affect the array elements themselves.
- We can make structured bindings of reference type by using the `auto&` syntax. This means the variables are now references to array elements and making changes to variables also changes the array elements.

- It is an excellent way of introducing and binding multiple variables to some container-like expression elements.
## std::filesystem

- The `std::filesystem` library allows us to work with files, paths, and folders on our system.
- The library is declared through a `<filesystem>` header. 
- Paths can represent paths to files and paths to folders. 
- To check if a given folder exists, we use
```cpp
#include <iostream>
#include <filesystem>

int main(){
	std::filesystem::path folderpath = "C:\\MyFolder\\";

if (std::filesystem::exists(folderpath)){
	std::cout << "The path: " << folderpath << " exists.";
}else{
	std::cout << "The path: " << folderpath << " does not exist.";
}
```

- Similarly, we can use the `std::filesystem::path` object to check if a file exists.
- To iterate over folder elements, we use the `std::filesystem::directory_iterator` iterator.
- To iterate over folder elements recursively, we use the `std::filesystem::recursive_directory_iterator`. This allows us to iterate recursively over all subfolders in a folder.

 - The following are some useful utility functions inside the std::filesystem namespace:
	 - `std::filesystem::create_directory` for creating a directory
	 - `std::filesystem::copy` for copying files and directories
	 - `std::filesystem::remove` for removing a file or an empty folder
	 - `std::filesystem::remove_all` for removing folders and subfolders
## std::string_view

- Copying data can be an expensive operation in terms of CPU usage. Passing substrings as function parameters would require making a copy of substrings. This is a costly operation. The string_view class template is an attempt to rectify that.
- The string_view is a non-owning view of a string or a substring. It is a reference to something that is already there in the memory. It is implemented as a pointer to some character sequence plus the size of that sequence. With this kind of structure, we can parse strings efficiently.
- The `std::string_view` is declared inside the `<string_view>` header file.

- Once we create a `string_view`, we can use its member functions. To create a substring out of a `string_view`, we use the `.substr()` member function. To create a substring, we supply the starting position index and length.

- A `string_view` allows us to parse (not change) the data that is already in the memory without having to make copies of the data. This data is owned by another string or character array object.
## std::any

- The `std::any` container can hold a single value of any type. This container is declared inside the `<any>` header file. Example:
```cpp
#include <any>

int main(){
	std::any a = 345.678;
	std::any b = true;
	std::any c = 123;
}
```

- To access the value of a `std::any` object in a safe manner, we cast it to a type of our choice using the `std::any_cast` function:
```cpp
#include <iostream>
#include <any>

int main(){
	std::any a = 123;
	std::cout << "Any accessed as an integer: " << std::any_cast<int>(a) << '\n';

	a = 456.789;
	std::cout << "Any accessed as a double: " << std::any_cast<double>(a) << '\n';

	a = true;
	std::cout << "Any accessed as a boolean: " << std::any_cast<bool>(a) << '\n';
```

- Important, the `std::any_cast` will throw an exception if we try to convert, for example, 123 to type `double`. This function performs only type-safe conversions. 
- Another `std::any` member function is `.has_value()` which checks if the `std::any` object holds a value.
## std::variant

- There is another type of data in C++ called `union`. A `union` is a type whose data members of different types occupy the same memory. Only one data member can be accessed at a time. The size of a union in memory is the size of its largest data member. The data members overlap in a sense. To define a union type in C++, we write
```cpp
union MyUnion{
	char c;
	int x;
	double d;
};
```

- Here, we declared a union type that can hold characters or integers or doubles. The size of this union is the size of its largest data member double, which is probably eight bytes, depending on the implementation. Although the union declares multiple data members, it can only hold a value of one member at any given time. This is because all the data members share the same memory location. And we can only access the member that was the last written to. 
- Example:
```cpp
#include <iostream>

union MyUnion{
	char c;
	int x;
	double d;
};
	
int main(){
	MyUnion o;
	o.c = 'A';
	std::cout << o.c << '\n';
	// accessing o.x or o.d is undefined behavior at this point

	o.x = 123;
	std::cout << o.c;
	// accessing o.c or o.d is undefined behavior at this point

	o.d = 456.789;
	std::cout << o.c;
	// accessing o.c or o.x is undefined behavior at this point
}
```

- C++17 introduces a new way of working with unions using the `std::variant` class template from a `<variant>` header. This class template offers a type-safe way of storing and accessing a union. 
- To declare a variant using a `std::variant`, we would write
```cpp
#include <variant>

int main(){
	std::variant<char, int, double> myvariant;
}
```

- This example defines a variant that can hold three types. When we initialize or assign a value to a variant, an appropriate type is chosen. For example, if we initialize a variant with a character value, the variant will currently hold a char data member. Accessing other members at this point will throw an exception. 
- Example:
```cpp
#include <iostream>
#include <variant>

int main(){
	std::variant<char, int, double> myvariant{ 'a' }; 
	// variant now holds a char

	std::cout << std::get<0>(myvariant) << '\n'; 
	// obtain a data member by index
	
	std::cout << std::get<char>(myvariant) << '\n'; 
	// obtain a data member by type

	myvariant = 1024; // variant now holds an int
	std::cout << std::get<1>(myvariant) << '\n'; // by index
	std::cout << std::get<int>(myvariant) << '\n'; // by type
	myvariant = 123.456; // variant now holds a double
}
```

- We can access a variant value by index using the `std::get<index_number>`(variant_name) function. Or we can access the variant value by a type name using `std::get<type_name>(variant_name)`.
- If we tried to access a wrong type or wrong index member, an exception of type `const std::bad_variant_access&` would be raised. 