# C++11

- C++11 is an ISO C++ standard published in 2011. 
- To compile for this standard, add the `-std=c++11` flag to a command-line compilation string if compiling with g++ or clang.
## Automatic Type Deduction

- This standard introduces the auto keyword, which deduces the type of the variable based on the variable’s initializer.
## Range-Based Loops

- The range-based loops allow us to iterate over the range, such as C++ Standard Library containers.
## Initializer Lists

- Initializer lists, represented by braces {` }`, allow us to initialize objects in a uniform way.
- We can initialize single objects:
```cpp
int main(){
	int x{ 123 };
	int y = { 456 };
	double d{ 3.14 };
}
```

- and containers:
```cpp
#include <vector>

int main(){
	std::vector<int> v = { 1, 2, 3, 4, 5 };
}
```

- List initialization also prevents ***narrowing conversions***. If we tried to initialize our integer object with a double value inside the initializer list, the compilation would fail:
```cpp
int main(){
	int x = { 123.45 }; // Error, does not allowing narrowing
}
```

- When initializing our objects, we should prefer initializer lists {} to old-style parentheses `()`.
## Move Semantics

- The C++11 standard introduces the move semantics for classes. 
- We can initialize our objects by moving the data from other objects. This is achieved through move constructors and move assignment operators. Both accept the so-called ***rvalue reference*** as an argument. 
- ***Lvalue*** is an expression that can be used on the left-hand side of the assignment operation. 
- ***Rvalues*** are expressions that can be used on the right-hand side of an assignment.
- The rvalue reference has the signature of `some_type&&`. 
- To cast an expression to an rvalue reference, we use the `std::move` function.
- A simple move constructor and move assignment signature are:
```cpp
class MyClass{
public:
	MyClass(MyClass&& otherobject) // move constructor
	{
		//implement the move logic here
	}

	MyClass& operator=(MyClass&& otherobject) // move assignment operator
	{
		// implement the move logic here
		return *this;
	}
};
```
## Lambda Expressions

- Lambda expressions are anonymous function objects. They allow us to write a short code snippet to be used as a standard library function predicate. 
- Lambdas have 
	- a capture list marked by `[ ]` where we can capture local variables by reference or copy, 
	- a parameter list with optional parameters marked with `( )`, and 
	- a lambda body marked with `{ }`. 
- An empty lambda looks like `[](){};`.
## The constexpr Specifier

- The `constexpr` specifier promises the variable or a function can be evaluated during compile time. If the expression cannot be evaluated during compile time, the compiler emits an error.
## Scoped Enumerators

- The C++11 standard introduces the scoped enumerators. Unlike the old enumerators, the scoped enumerators do not leak their names into the surrounding scope. 
- Scoped `enum`s have the following signature: 
```cpp
enum class Enumerator_Name {value1, value2, etc.}
```
## Smart Pointers

- Smart pointers point to objects, and when the pointer goes out of scope, the object gets destroyed. This makes them smart in the sense that we do not have to worry about the manual deallocation of allocated memory. The smart pointers do all the heavy lifting for us.
- There are two kinds of smart pointers, 
	- the unique pointer with a `std::unique_ptr<Type>` signature and 
	- a shared pointer with a `std::shared_ptr<Type>` signature. 

- The difference between the two is that we can have only one unique pointer pointing at the object. In contrast, we can have multiple shared pointers pointing at an object. 
- When the unique pointer goes out of scope, the object gets destroyed, and the memory is deallocated. 
- When the last of the shared pointers pointing at our object goes out of scope, the object gets destroyed. The memory gets deallocated.

- A unique pointer cannot be copied, only moved. 
- Shared pointers can be copied. It is said they share ownership of the object.
## std::unordered_set

- The `std::unordered_set` is a container that allows for constant time insertion, searching, and removal of elements. This container is implemented as an array of buckets of linked lists. The hash value of each element is calculated, and the object is placed into an appropriate bucket based on the hash value. The object themselves are not sorted in any particular order.
- To define an unordered set, we need to include the `<unordered_set>` header.

- The values are not sorted but are unique. To insert single or multiple values into an `unordered_set`, we use the `.insert()` member function.
- To delete a value from an unordered set, we use the `.erase()` member function.
## std::unordered_map

- Similar to `std::unordered_set`, there is also a `std::unordered_map`, an unordered container of key-value pairs with unique keys. This container also allows for fast insertion, searching, and removal of elements. The container’s data is implemented through buckets. What element goes into what bucket depends on the element’s key hash value. 
- To define an unordered map, we include the `<unordered_map>` header.

- Map elements are pairs. Pairs have data members `.first` for accessing a key and `.second` for accessing a value. 
- To insert an element into a map, we can use the `.insert()` member function.

- We can also use the map’s operator `[]` to insert an element. Normally, this operator is used to access an element value by key. However, if the key does not exist, the operator inserts a new element into the map.
## std::tuple

- While `std::pair` can hold only two values, the `std::tuple` wrapper can hold more than two values. 
- To use tuples, we need to include the `<tuple>` header. 
- To access a certain tuple element, we use the `std::get<index_of_an_element>(tuple_name)` function:
```cpp
#include <iostream>
#include <utility>
#include <tuple>

int main(){
	std::tuple<char, int, double> mytuple = { 'a', 123, 3.14 };
	std::cout << "The first element is: " << std::get<0>(mytuple) << '\n';
	std::cout << "The second element is: " << std::get<1>(mytuple) << '\n';
	std::cout << "The third element is: " << std::get<2>(mytuple) << '\n';
}
```

- We can create a tuple using the `std::make_tuple` function:
```cpp
#include <iostream>
#include <tuple>
#include <string>

int main(){
	auto mytuple = std::make_tuple<int, double, std::string>(123, 3.14, "Hello World.");

	std::cout << "The first tuple element is: " << std::get<0>(mytuple) << '\n';
	std::cout << "The second tuple element is: " << std::get<1>(mytuple) << '\n';
	std::cout << "The third tuple element is: " << std::get<2>(mytuple) << '\n';
}
```

- Instead of typing a lengthy tuple type, which is `std::tuple<int, double, std::string>`, we used the `auto` specifier to deduce the type name for us.
## static_assert

- The` static_assert` directive checks a static (`constexpr`) condition during compile time. If the condition is false, the directive fails the compilation and displays an error message.
- Example:
```cpp
int main(){
	constexpr int x = 123;
	static_assert(x == 456, "The constexpr value is not 456.");
}
```

- Here, the `static_assert` checks if the value of x is equal to 456 during compile time. Since it is not, the compilation will fail with a "The `constexpr` value is not 456." message. We can think of the `static_assert` as a way of testing our code during compile time. It is also a neat way of testing if the value of a constexpr expression is what we expect it to be.
## Introduction to Concurrency

- The C++11 standard introduces facilities for working with threads. To enable threading, we need to add the `-pthread` flag when compiling with g++ and clang on the command line. 
- Example:
```shell
g++ -std=c++11 -Wall -pthread source.cpp
```
- With clang, it will be
```shell
clang++ -std=c++11 -Wall -pthread source.cpp
```

- When we compile and link our source code program, an executable file is produced. When we start the executable, the program gets loaded into memory and starts running. This running program is called a process. When we start multiple executable files, we can have multiple processes.
- Each process has its own memory and its own address space. Within a process, there can be multiple threads. What are threads or threads of execution? They are an OS mechanism that allows us to execute multiple pieces of code concurrently/simultaneously.
- For example, we can execute multiple functions concurrently using threads. In a broader sense, concurrently can also mean ***in parallel***. A thread is part of the process. A process can spawn one or more threads. Threads share the same memory and thus can communicate with each other using this shared memory.

- To create a thread object, we use the `std::thread` class template from a `<thread>` header file. Once defined, the thread starts executing. To create a thread that executes a code inside a function, we supply the function name to the thread constructor as a parameter. 
- Example:
```cpp
#include <iostream>
#include <thread>

void function1()
{
	for (int i = 0; i < 5; i++){
	std::cout << "Executing function1." << '\n';
	}
}

int main(){
	std::thread t1{ function1 }; // create and start a thread
	t1.join(); // wait for the t1 thread to finish
}
```

- Here, we have defined a thread called ***t1*** that executes a ***function function1***. We supply the function name to the `std::thread` constructor as a first parameter. In a way, our program now has a main thread, which is the `main()` function itself, and the t1 thread, which was created from the main thread. The `.join()` member function says: “*main thread, please wait for me to finish my work before continuing with yours.*" If we left out the `.join()` function, the main thread would finish executing before the t1 thread has finished its work. We avoid this by ***joining*** the child thread to the main thread.
- If our function accepts parameters, we can pass those parameters when constructing the `std::thread` object:
```cpp
#include <iostream>
#include <thread>
#include <string>

void function1(const std::string& param){
	for (int i = 0; i < 5; i++){
	std::cout << "Executing function1, " << param << '\n';
	}
}

int main(){
	std::thread t1{ function1, "Hello World from a thread." };
	t1.join();
}
```

- We can spawn multiple threads in our program/process by constructing multiple `std::thread` objects. Here’s an example where we have two threads executing two different functions concurrently/in parallel:
```cpp
#include <iostream>
#include <thread>

void function1(){
	for (int i = 0; i < 5; i++){
		std::cout << "Executing function1." << '\n';
	}
}

void function2(){
	for (int i = 0; i < 5; i++){
	std::cout << "Executing function2." << '\n';
	}
}

int main(){
	std::thread t1{ function1 };
	std::thread t2{ function2 };
	t1.join();
	t2.join();
}
```

- This example creates two threads executing two different functions concurrently. The function1 code executes in a thread t1, and the function2 code executes in a separate thread called t2.
- We can also have multiple threads executing code from the same function concurrently.
```cpp
#include <iostream>
#include <thread>
#include <string>

void myfunction(const std::string& param){
	for (int i = 0; i < 5; i++){
		std::cout << "Executing function from a " << param << '\n';
	}
}

int main(){
	std::thread t1{ myfunction, "Thread 1" };
	std::thread t2{ myfunction, "Thread 2" };
	t1.join();
	t2.join();
}
```

- Threads sometimes need to access the same object. In our example, both threads are accessing the global `std::cout` object in order to output the data. This can be a problem. Accessing the `std::cout` object from two different threads at the same time allows one thread to write a little to it, then another thread jumps in and writes a little to it, and we can end up with some strange text in the console window.

- This means we need to synchronize the access to a shared std::cout object somehow. While one thread is writing to it, we need to ensure that the thread does not write to it. We do so by locking and unlocking ***mutexes***. A ***mutex*** is represented by a `std::mutex` class template from a `<mutex>` header. 
- A mutex is a way to synchronize access to shared objects between multiple threads. A thread owns a mutex once it locks the mutex, then performs access to shared data and unlocks the mutex when access to shared data is no longer needed. This ensures only one thread at a time can have access to a shared object, which is `std::cout` in our case.

- Here is an example where two threads execute the same function and guard access to the `std::cout` object by locking and unlocking mutexes:
```cpp
#include <iostream>
#include <thread>
#include <string>
#include <mutex>

std::mutex m; // will guard std::cout
void myfunction(const std::string& param){
	for (int i = 0; i < 5; i++){
		m.lock();
		std::cout << "Executing function from a " << param << '\n';
		m.unlock();
	}
}

int main(){
	std::thread t1{ myfunction, "Thread 1" };
	std::thread t2{ myfunction, "Thread 2" };
	t1.join();
	t2.join();
}
```

- Since we can forget to unlock the mutex manually, a better approach is to use the `std::lock_guard` function instead. It locks the mutex, and once it goes out of scope, it automatically unlocks the mutex. 
- Example:
```cpp
#include <iostream>
#include <thread>
#include <string>
#include <mutex>

std::mutex m; // will guard std::cout
void myfunction(const std::string& param){
	for (int i = 0; i < 5; i++){
		std::lock_guard<std::mutex> lg(m);
		std::cout << "Executing function from a " << param << '\n';
	} // lock_guard goes out of scope here and unlocks the mutex
}

int main(){
	std::thread t1{ myfunction, "Thread 1" };
	std::thread t2{ myfunction, "Thread 2" };
	t1.join();
	t2.join();
}
```
## Deleted and Defaulted Functions

- If we do not supply a default constructor, the compiler will generate one for us.
- However, in certain situations, the default constructor will not be implicitly generated. For example, when we define a copy constructor for our class, the default constructor is implicitly deleted.

- To force the instantiation of a default, compiler-generated constructor, we provide the `=default` specifier in its declaration. 
- Example:
```cpp
#include <iostream>
class MyClass{
public:
	MyClass() = default; // defaulted member function
	MyClass(const MyClass& other){
		std::cout << "Copy constructor invoked.";
	}
};

int main(){
	MyClass o; // Now OK, the defaulted default constructor is there
	MyClass o2 = o; // Invoking the copy constructor
}
```

- The `=default` specifier, when used on a member function, means: whatever the language rules, I want this default member function to be there. I do not want it to be implicitly disabled.
- Similarly, if we want to disable a member function from appearing, we use the `=delete` specifier. To disable the copy constructor and copy assignment, we would write
```cpp
#include <iostream>

class MyClass{
public:
	MyClass(){
		std::cout << "Default constructor invoked.";
	}

	MyClass(const MyClass& other) = delete; // delete the copy constructor
	MyClass& operator=(const MyClass& other) = delete; // delete the copy
													// assignment operator
};

int main(){
	MyClass o; // OK
	MyClass o2 = o; // Error, a call to deleted copy constructor
	MyClass o3;
	o3 = o; // Error, a call to the deleted copy assignment operator
}
```

- These specifiers are mostly used in situations where we want to
	1. Force the instantiation of implicitly defined member functions such as constructors and assignment operators when we use the `=default;` expression
	2. Disable the instantiation of implicitly defined member functions using the `=delete;` expression
- These expressions can also be used for other functions.
## Type Aliases

- A type alias is a user-provided name for the existing type. If we want to use a different name for the existing type, we write 
```cpp
using my_type_name = existing_type_name;
```