# C++20

- The C++20 standard promises to bring some big additions to the language. Its impact on the existing standards is said to be as big as the C++11 was on a C++98/C++03 standard.
## Modules

- Modules are the new C++20 feature, which aims to eliminate the need for the separation of code into header and source files. 
- So far, in traditional C++, we have organized our source code using header and source files. We keep our declarations/interfaces in header files. We put our definitions/implementations in source files.

- We include the same header multiple times. This increases compilation time. Modules are included only once, and we do not have to separate the code into interface and implementation. One way is to have a single module file, for example, mymodule.cpp, where we provide the entire implementation and export of this function.

- A module can also provide an implementation but does need to export it. If we do not want our function to be visible to the main program, we will omit the export specifier in the module. This makes the implementation private to the module.
- If we have a module with a namespace in it, and a declaration inside that namespace is exported, the entire namespace is exported. Within that namespace, only the exported functions are visible.
## Concepts

- Remember the class templates and function templates providing generic types `T?` If we want our template argument `T` to satisfy certain requirements, then we use concepts. In other words, we want our `T` to satisfy certain compile-time criteria.
- The signature for a `concept` is
```cpp
template <typename T>
concept concept_name = requires (T var_name) { requirement_expression; };
```

- The second line defines a concept name followed by a reserved word requires, followed by an optional template argument `T` and a local `var_name`, followed by a requirement_expression which is a `constexpr` of type bool.
- In a nutshell, the concept predicate specifies the requirements a template argument must satisfy in order to be used in a template. Some of the requirements we can write ourselves, and some are already pre-made.
- We can say that concepts constrain types to certain requirements. They can also be seen as a sort of compile-time assertions for our template types.

- There are multiple predefined concepts in the C++20 standard. They check if the type fulfills certain requirements. These predefined concepts are located inside the `<concepts>` header. Some of them are
	- a. `std::integral` – Specifies that the type should be an integral type
	- b. `std::boolean` – Specifies the type that can be used as a boolean type
	- c. `std::move_constructible` – Specifies that the object of a particular type can be constructed using the move semantics
	- d. `std::movable` – Specifies that the object of a certain type T can be moved
	- e. `std::signed_integral` – Says the type is both integral and a signed integral
## Lambda Templates

- We can now use template syntax in our lambda functions. Example:
```cpp
auto mylambda = []<typename T>(T param){
	// code
};
```

## \[likely] and \[unlikely] Attributes

- If we know that some paths of execution are more likely to be executed than others, we can help the compiler optimize the code by placing attributes. We use the `[[likely]]` attribute before the statement that is more likely to be executed. We can also put the `[[unlikely]]` attribute before the statement that is unlikely to be executed. 
## Ranges

- A range, in general, is an object that refers to a range of elements. The new C++20 ranges feature is declared inside a `<ranges>` header. 
- The ranges themselves are accessed via the `std::ranges` name. 

- With classic containers such as a `std::vector`, if we want to sort the data, we would use
```cpp
#include <iostream>
#include <vector>
#include <algorithm>

int main(){
	std::vector<int> v = { 1, 2, 3, 4, 5 };
	std::sort(v.begin(), v.end());
	for (auto el : v){
		std::cout << el << '\n';
	}
}
```

- The `std::sort` function accepts the vector’s `.begin()` and `.end()` iterators. With ranges, it is much simpler. We just provide the name of the range without iterators:
```cpp
#include <iostream>
#include <ranges>
#include <vector>
#include <algorithm>

int main(){
	std::vector<int> v = { 3, 5, 2, 1, 4 };
	std::ranges::sort(v);
	for (auto el : v){
		std::cout << el << '\n';
	}
}
```

- Ranges have a feature called ***adaptors***. One of the range adaptors is ***views***. 
- The views adaptors are accessed via `std::ranges::views`. 
- Views are non-owning. They cannot change the values of the underlying elements. It is also said they are lazily executed. Thismeans the code from the views adaptors will not be executed until we iterate over the result of such views.
- It’s important to note that the underlying vector’s elements are unaffected as we are operating on a ***view***, not on a vector.

- Other range adaptors are algorithms. The idea is to have the algorithms overload for ranges. 
- To call an algorithm adaptor, we use `std::ranges::algorithm_ name(parameters)`
- Unlike views, the ranges algorithms modify the actual vector content.
## Coroutines

- A coroutine is a function that can be suspended and resumed. The ordinary function is a coroutine if it uses any of the following operators in its function body:
	- f. `co_await` – Suspends the execution of the coroutine until some other computation is performed, that is, until the coroutine itself resumes
	- g. `co_yield` – Suspends a coroutine and returns a value to the caller
	- h. `co_return` – Returns from a coroutine and stops its execution
## std::span

- Some containers and types store their elements in a sequence, one next to the other. This is the case for arrays and vectors. We can represent such containers with a pointer to their first element plus the length of the container. 
- A `std::span` class template from a `<span>` header is just that – a reference to a span of contiguous container elements. One reason to use the `std::span` is that it is cheap to construct and copy. A span does not own a vector or an array it references. However, it can change the value of the elements. 
- To create a span from a vector, we use
```cpp
#include <iostream>
#include <vector>
#include<span>

int main(){
	std::vector<int> v = { 1, 2, 3 };
	std::span<int> myintspan = v;
	myintspan[2] = 256;

	for (auto el : v){
		std::cout << el << '\n';
	}
}
```

- Here, we created a span that references vector elements. Then we used the span to change the vector’s third element. With span, we do not have to worry about passing a pointer and a length around, and we just use the neat syntax of a span wrapper. Since the size of the vector can change, we say our span has a ***dynamic extent***. We can create a fixed-size span from a fixed-size array. We say our span now has a ***static extent***.
## Mathematical Constants

- The C++20 standard introduces a way to represent some of the mathematical constants.
- To use them, we need to include the `<numbers>` header. 
- The constants themselves are inside the `std::numbers` namespace. 

- The following example shows how to use numbers pi and e, the results of logarithmic functions, and the square roots of numbers 2 and 3:
```cpp
#include <iostream>
#include <numbers>

int main(){
	std::cout << "Pi: " << std::numbers::pi << '\n';
	std::cout << "e: " << std::numbers::e << '\n';
	std::cout << "log2(e): " << std::numbers::log2e << '\n';
	std::cout << "log10(e): " << std::numbers::log10e << '\n';
	std::cout << "ln(2): " << std::numbers::ln2 << '\n';
	std::cout << "ln(10): " << std::numbers::ln10 << '\n';
	std::cout << "sqrt(2): " << std::numbers::sqrt2 << '\n';
	std::cout << "sqrt(3): " << std::numbers::sqrt3 << '\n';
}```