# C++23

- Compared to C++20, the C++23 standard introduces fewer new features.
## Multidimensional Subscript Operator

- Up to C++23, if we wanted to access a multidimensional array element, let us say in a two-dimensional array, we had to use the following syntax:
```cpp
myarr[x_index][y_index];
```

- Before C++23, if we wanted to access an array element in a three-dimensional array, we would write:
```cpp
myarr[x_index][y_index][z_index];
```

- Starting with the C++23, we can use the multidimensional subscript operator \[], inside which we provide comma-separated indexes:
```cpp
myarr[x_index, y_index];
```

- For a three-dimensional array, the C++23 syntax would be 
```cpp
myarr[x_index, y_index, z_index];
```

- The syntax for overloading a multidimensional subscript operator for a class
is simple:
```cpp
MyClass& operator[](size_t dimension_1, size_t dimension_2, etc... )
noexcept {
	// code
}
```
## Literal Suffixes for size_t

- Before C++23, we had several integer literal suffixes such as `u`, `l`, `ul`, `ll`, etc. These literal suffixes made the literals of a certain type. 
- Example:
```cpp
auto x1 = 123u; // unsigned
auto x2 = 123l; // long
auto x3 = 123ul; // unsigned long
auto x4 = 123ll; // long long
```

- Starting with C++23, we have the `uz` literal suffix, which makes a literal of type `std::size_t`. Example:
```cpp
auto x5 = 123uz; // std::size_t
```
- And we also have the z literal, which makes the literal of the signed integer type corresponding to the `std::size_t` type. Example:
```cpp
auto x6 = 123z; // the signed integer type corresponding to std::size_t type
```
## The \#warning Preprocessor Directive

- We can now issue a custom, user-defined warning or diagnostic message without interrupting the translation process using the `#warning` preprocessor directive.
- The `#warning` directive has the following syntax: 
```cpp
#warning "Custom warning message".
```
## The `std::string::contains( )` Member Function

- Starting with the C++23 standard, the `std::string` type now has the `.contains(“given substring”)` member function.
- This function checks if the string contains a given substring and returns the value of true if the string contains the given substring and false otherwise.
- Prior to C++23, if we wanted to check if a string contained a given substring, we had to use the `.find()` member function and inspect its return value against the special value of `std::string::npos`.
## std::print

- The `std::print` function prints the format string to a standard output or a file. The function is defined inside the `<print>` header file and has the following syntax:
```cpp
std::print(<destination>, formatting_string, arguments);
```

- The destination can be a standard output or a file. The formatting string is a sequence of symbols that will become a formatted output for a string and the arguments’ values (for more info on the actual formatting rules, look to `std::format` and `std::formatter`.
- The formatting string has a placeholder for the argument, marked by {}. The placeholder will be the position of the argument’s formatted value.

- To print out the value of a single integer variable, we write:
```cpp
#include <print>

int main(){
	int x = 123;
	std::print("The value of x is {}.", x);
}
```

- The `std::print` is also capable of formatted print of built-in containers such as vectors, sets, maps, etc. There is also a `std::println` variant that adds a new line character at the end of a formatting string.