# 16. Polymorphic Poker

- Polymorphism is made possible by virtual functions.
- The address of a virtual function is not resolved until runtime. (This is also called ***late binding***.) The class of an object - as known at runtime - determines which implementation of a virtual function is executed.

- You cannot make a constructor virtual. Technically, you can make an inline function into a virtual function, but the compiler cannot expand it as an inline function unless it’s safe to do so.

- There is a small performance penalty and a small space penalty whenever a function is made virtual, but the advantages of making it a virtual function almost always make up for it.
- As a general rule, any member function that might be overridden should be declared `virtual`.

- A pure virtual function usually has no implementation (that is, no function definition) in the class in which it is declared. You declare a pure virtual function by using `=0` notation. 
- For example:
```cpp
virtual void print_me() =0;
```

- A class with at least one pure virtual function is an ***abstract class***. Such a class cannot be used to instantiate objects, although its subclasses can.
- Abstract classes are useful as a means to create a general interface - a list of services that a subclass provides by implementing all the virtual functions.

- In the final analysis, polymorphism is a way of liberating objects from slavish dependence on each other because the knowledge of how to perform a service is built into each individual object. Ultimately, it’s this feature that gives object orientation its special flavor and makes it object oriented, rather than merely class oriented.