# 22. Fuzzing and Mutating

- Your imagination limits the tests that you can create. Do you try to be malicious when calling your APIs? Do you intentionally pass malformed data to your inputs? 
- Do you process inputs from unknown or untrusted sources?
- Generating all possible inputs to all possible function calls in all possible combinations is impossible. Fortunately, tools exist to solve this problem. 
## Fuzzing

- Fuzz testers generate strings of random data of various lengths. The test harness you write consumes these strings of data and processes them in some way that is appropriate for your application. The fuzz tester analyzes coverage data generated from your test’s execution and uses that information Exercise: to remove Add redundant Another tests and Compiler generate new novel and unique tests. 
- In theory, a fuzz test will eventually reach 100% code coverage of your tested code, if left to run long enough. Combined with AddressSanitizer, this makes a powerful tool for finding bugs in your code. [One interesting article from 2015](https://blog.hboeck.de/archives/868-How-Heartbleed-couldve-been-found.html) describes how the combination of a fuzz tester and AddressSanitizer could have found the security flaw “heartbleed” in OpenSSL in less than 6 hrs.
	- This 6 hours is now drastically out of date. With modern fuzz testing tools and newer computers, a vulnerability like heartbleed can be discovered in just a few minutes.
	- Fuzz testing primarily finds memory and security flaws.
- Many different fuzzing tools exist. For the sake of this section, I am going to focus on [LLVM’s libFuzzer](https://www.llvm.org/docs/LibFuzzer.html). Most fuzz testers operate under the same premise. 

- Look into the newer(2022) fuzzing library from Google [FuzzTest](https://github.com/google/fuzztest) designed to simplify the process of hooking up fuzz tests into your project.
## Mutating

- Mutation testing works by modifying conditionals and constants in the code being tested. 