- C++ is a statically typed, compiled, general-purpose, case-sensitive, free-form programming language that supports procedural, object-oriented, and generic programming.
- C++ was developed by ***Bjarne Stroustrup*** starting in 1979 at Bell Labs in Murray Hill, New Jersey, as an enhancement to the C language and originally named C with Classes but later it was renamed C++ in 1983.

- ***Note***: A programming language is said to use static typing when type checking is performed during compile-time as opposed to run-time.
## Standard Libraries

***Standard C++ consists of three important parts:***
- The core language giving all the building blocks including variables, data types and literals, etc.
- The C++ Standard Library giving a rich set of functions manipulating files, strings, etc.
- The Standard Template Library (STL) giving a rich set of methods manipulating data structures, etc.
## Learning C++

- The most important thing while learning C++ is to focus on concepts.

- The purpose of learning a programming language is to become a better programmer; that is, to become more effective at designing and implementing new systems and at maintaining old ones.

- C++ supports a variety of programming styles. Each style can achieve its aims effectively while maintaining runtime and space efficiency.
## Use of C++

- C++ is used by hundreds of thousands of programmers in essentially every application domain.

- C++ is being highly used to write device drivers and other software that rely on direct manipulation of hardware under real-time constraints.

- C++ is widely used for teaching and research because it is clean enough for successful teaching of basic concepts.