# 12. Loop Types

- There may be a situation, when you need to execute a block of code several number of times. In general, statements are executed sequentially: The first statement in a function is executed first, followed by the second, and so on.
- Programming languages provide various control structures that allow for more complicated execution paths.
- A loop statement allows us to execute a statement or group of statements multiple times.

- C++ programming language provides the following type of loops:
	- while loop
	- for loop
	- do while loop
## While Loop

- A while loop statement repeatedly executes a target statement as long as a given condition is true.

- **Syntax**
- The syntax of a while loop in C++ is:
```cpp
while(condition)
{
	statement(s);
}
```

- Here, statement(s) may be a single statement or a block of statements.
- The condition may be any expression, and `true` is any non-zero value.
- The loop iterates while the condition is `true`.
- When the condition becomes false, program control passes to the line immediately following the loop.

- Key point of the while loop is that the loop might not ever run. When the condition is tested and the result is `false`, the loop body will be skipped and the first statement after the while loop will be executed.
## for Loop

- A `for` loop is a repetition control structure that allows you to efficiently write a loop that needs to execute a specific number of times.

- **Syntax**
- The syntax of a for loop in C++ is:
```cpp
for ( init; condition; increment )
{
	statement(s);
}
```

- Here is the flow of control in a for loop:
1. The **init** step is executed first, and only once. This step allows you to declare and initialize any loop control variables. You are not required to put a statement here, as long as a semicolon appears.
2. Next, the condition is evaluated. If it is true, the body of the loop is executed. If it is false, the body of the loop does not execute and flow of control jumps to the next statement just after the for loop.
3. After the body of the for loop executes, the flow of control jumps back up to the increment statement. This statement allows you to update any loop control variables. This statement can be left blank, as long as a semicolon appears after the condition.
4. The condition is now evaluated again. If it is true, the loop executes and the process repeats itself (body of loop, then increment step, and then again condition). After the condition becomes false, the for loop terminates.
## do while Loop

- Unlike for and while loops, which test the loop condition at the top of the loop, the `do`...`while` loop checks its condition at the bottom of the loop.
- A `do` `while` loop is similar to a `while` loop, except that a `do` `while` loop is guaranteed to execute at least one time.

- **Syntax**
- The syntax of a do...while loop in C++ is:
```cpp
do
{
	statement(s);
}while( condition );
```

- If the condition is true, the flow of control jumps back up to do, and the  statement(s) in the loop execute again. This process repeats until the given condition becomes false.

## Loop Control Statements

- Loop control statements change execution from its normal sequence. When execution leaves a scope, all automatic objects that were created in that scope are destroyed.

- C++ supports the following control statements.
	- `break` - Terminates the loop or switch statement and transfers execution to the statement immediately following the loop or switch.
	- `continue` - Causes the loop to skip the remainder of its body and immediately retest its condition prior to reiterating.
	- `goto` - Transfers control to the labeled statement. Though it is not advised to use goto statement in your program.
### Break

- The break statement has the following two usages in C++:
	- When the break statement is encountered inside a loop, the loop is immediately terminated and program control resumes at the next statement following the loop.
	- It can be used to terminate a case in the switch statement.

- If you are using nested loops (i.e., one loop inside another loop), the `break` statement will stop the execution of the innermost loop and start executing the next line of code after the block.

- **Syntax**
- The syntax of a `break` statement in C++ is:
```cpp
break;
```
### continue

- The `continue` statement works somewhat like the `break` statement. Instead of forcing termination, however, `continue` forces the next iteration of the loop to take place, skipping any code in between.
- For the `for` loop, `continue` causes the conditional test and increment portions of the loop to execute. For the `while` and `do`...`while` loops, program control passes to the conditional tests.

- **Syntax**
- The syntax of a `continue` statement in C++ is:
```cpp
continue;
```
### goto

- A `goto` statement provides an unconditional jump from the `goto` to a labeled statement in the same function.
- **NOTE**: Use of `goto` statement is highly discouraged because it makes difficult to trace the control flow of a program, making the program hard to understand and hard to modify. Any program that uses a `goto` can be rewritten so that it doesn't need the `goto`.

- **Syntax**
- The syntax of a `goto` statement in C++ is:
```cpp
goto label;
..
.
label: statement;
```

- Where label is an identifier that identifies a labeled statement. A labeled statement is any statement that is preceded by an identifier followed by a colon (`:`).