# 14. Functions

- A function is a group of statements that together perform a task.
- You can divide up your code into separate functions. How you divide up your code among different functions is up to you, but logically the division usually is such that each function performs a specific task.

- A function ***declaration*** tells the compiler about a function's name, return type, and parameters. 
- A function ***definition*** provides the actual body of the function.

- The C++ standard library provides numerous built-in functions that your program can call.
- The general form of a C++ function definition is as follows:
```cpp
return_type function_name( parameter list ){
	body of the function
}
```

- A C++ function definition consists of a function header and a function body.

- Parameter names are not important in function declaration only their type is required, so following is also valid declaration:
```cpp
int max(int, int);
```

- Function declaration is required when you define a function in one source file and you call that function in another file. In such case, you should declare the function at the top of the file calling the function.
- To use a function, you will have to call or invoke that function.
- When a program calls a function, program control is transferred to the called function. A called function performs defined task and when it’s return statement is executed or when its function-ending closing brace is reached, it returns program control back to the main program.
## Call by Value

- The call by value method of passing arguments to a function copies the actual value of an argument into the formal parameter of the function. In this case, changes made to the parameter inside the function have no effect on the argument.
- By default, C++ uses call by value to pass arguments. In general, this means that code within a function cannot alter the arguments used to call the function.
## Call by Pointer

- The call by pointer method of passing arguments to a function copies the address of an argument into the formal parameter. Inside the function, the address is used to access the actual argument used in the call. This means that changes made to the parameter affect the passed argument.
- You need to declare the function parameters as pointer types.

```cpp
// function declaration
void swap(int *x, int *y);
```

## Call by Reference

- The call by reference method of passing arguments to a function copies the reference of an argument into the formal parameter. Inside the function, the reference is used to access the actual argument used in the call. This means that changes made to the parameter affect the passed argument.

- To pass the value by reference, argument reference is passed to the functions just like any other value. So accordingly you need to declare the function parameters as reference types.

## Default Values for Parameters

- When you define a function, you can specify a default value for each of the last parameters. This value will be used if the corresponding argument is left blank when calling to the function.

- This is done by using the assignment operator and assigning values for the arguments in the function definition. If a value for that parameter is not passed when the function is called, the default given value is used, but if a value is specified, this default value is ignored and the passed value is used instead.
```cpp
int sum(int a, int b=20)
```