# 16. Arrays

- C++ provides a data structure, the array, which stores a fixed-size sequential collection of elements of the same type. An array is used to store a collection of data, but it is often more useful to think of an array as a collection of variables of the same type.

- A specific element in an array is accessed by an index.
- All arrays consist of contiguous memory locations. The lowest address corresponds to the first element and the highest address to the last element.
## Declaring Arrays

To declare an array in C++, the programmer specifies the type of the elements
and the number of elements required by an array as follows:
```cpp
type arrayName [ arraySize ];
```

- This is called a single-dimension array. The arraySize must be an integer constant greater than zero and type can be any valid C++ data type.
## Initializing Arrays

- You can initialize C++ array elements either one by one or using a single statement as follows:
```cpp
double balance[5] = {1000.0, 2.0, 3.4, 17.0, 50.0};
```

- The number of values between braces `{ }` cannot be larger than the number of elements that we declare for the array between square brackets `[]`.
- If you omit the size of the array, an array just big enough to hold the initialization is created. Therefore, if you write:
```cpp
double balance[] = {1000.0, 2.0, 3.4, 17.0, 50.0};
```

- You will create exactly the same array as you did in the previous example.

- Arrays have `0` as the index of their first element which is also called **Base Index**.
## Accessing Array Elements

- An element is accessed by indexing the array name. This is done by placing the index of the element within square brackets after the name of the array.
## Arrays in C++

- There are a few important concepts, which should be clear to a C++ programmer:

| Concept                     | Description                                                                                                               |
| --------------------------- | ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| Multi-dimensional arrays    | C++ supports multidimensional arrays. The<br>simplest form of the multidimensional array is<br>the two-dimensional array. |
| Pointer to an array         | You can generate a pointer to the first<br>element of an array by simply specifying the<br>array name, without any index. |
| Passing arrays to functions | You can pass to the function a pointer to an array by specifying the array's name without an index.                       |
| Return array from functions | C++ allows a function to return an array.                                                                                 |
## Multi-dimensional Arrays

- C++ allows multidimensional arrays.
- Here is the general form of a multidimensional array declaration:
```cpp
type name[size1][size2]...[sizeN];
```
## Pointer to an Array

- An array name is a constant pointer to the first element of the array. Therefore, in the declaration:
```cpp
double balance[50];
```
- balance is a pointer to `&balance[0]`, which is the address of the first element of the array balance.
- It is legal to use array names as constant pointers, and vice versa. 
- Therefore, `*(balance + 4)` is a legitimate way of accessing the data at `balance[4]`.
## Passing Arrays to Functions

- C++ does not allow to pass an entire array as an argument to a function. However, You can pass a pointer to an array by specifying the array's name without an index.
- If you want to pass a single-dimension array as an argument in a function, you would have to declare function formal parameter in one of following three ways and all three declaration methods produce similar results because each tells the compiler that an integer pointer is going to be received.
### Way-1

- Formal parameters as a pointer as follows:
```cpp
void myFunction(int *param){
...
}
```
### Way-2

- Formal parameters as a sized array as follows:
```cpp
void myFunction(int param[10]){
...
}
```
### Way-3

- Formal parameters as an unsized array as follows:
```cpp
void myFunction(int param[]){
...
}
```

- The length of the array doesn't matter as far as the function is concerned because C++ performs no bounds checking for the formal parameters.
## Return Array from Functions

- C++ does not allow to return an entire array as an argument to a function. However, you can return a pointer to an array by specifying the array's name without an index.
- If you want to return a single-dimension array from a function, you would have to declare a function returning a pointer as in the following example:
```cpp
int * myFunction(){
...
}
```

- Second point to remember is that C++ does not advocate to return the address of a local variable to outside of the function so you would have to define the local variable as `static` variable.