# 23. Classes and Objects

## C++ Class Definitions

- When you define a class, you define a blueprint for a data type. This doesn't actually define any data, but it does define what the class name means, that is, what an object of the class will consist of and what operations can be performed on such an object.
- A class definition starts with the keyword `class` followed by the class name; and the class body, enclosed by a pair of curly braces and ends with a semicolon.
## Define C++ Objects

- A class provides the blueprints for objects, so basically an object is created from a class. We declare objects of a class with exactly the same sort of declaration that we declare variables of basic types. 
- Following statements declare two objects of class Box:
```cpp 
Box Box1;      // Declare Box1 of type Box
Box Box2;      // Declare Box2 of type Box
```

- Both of the objects Box1 and Box2 will have their own copy of data members.
## Accessing the Data Members

- The public data members of objects of a class can be accessed using the direct member access operator `.`.
## Classes & Objects in Detail

| Concept                   | Description                                                                                                                                                                                                           |
| ------------------------- | --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| Class member functions    | A member function of a class is a function that has its definition or its prototype within the class definition like any other variable.                                                                              |
| Class access modifiers    | A class member can be defined as `public`, `private` or  `protected`. By default members would be assumed as `private`.                                                                                               |
| Constructor & destructor  | A class ***constructor*** is a special function in a class that is called when a new object of the class is created.<br>A ***destructor*** is also a special function which is called when created object is deleted. |
| C++ copy constructor      | The copy constructor is a constructor which creates an object by initializing it with an object of the same class, which has been created previously.                                                                 |
| C++ friend functions      | A **friend** function is permitted full access to<br>private and protected members of a class.                                                                                                                        |
| C++ inline functions      | With an inline function, the compiler tries to<br>expand the code in the body of the function in<br>place of a call to the function.                                                                                  |
| The `this` pointer in C++ | Every object has a special pointer `this` which points to the object itself.                                                                                                                                          |
| Pointer to C++ classes    | A pointer to a class is done exactly the same way a pointer to a structure is. In fact a class is really just a structure with functions in it.                                                                       |
| Static members of a class | Both data members and function members of a class can be declared as static.                                                                                                                                          |
## Class member functions

- A member function of a class is a function that has its definition or its prototype within the class definition like any other variable. It operates on any object of the class of which it is a member, and has access to all the members of a class for that object.
- Member functions can be defined within the class definition or separately using ***scope resolution operator***, `::`.
- An important point is that you would have to use class name just before `::`operator. A member function will be called using a dot operator `.` on a object where it will manipulate data related to that object.
## Class Access Modifiers

- Data hiding is one of the important features of Object Oriented Programming which allows preventing the functions of a program to access directly the internal representation of a class type. 
- The access restriction to the class members is specified by the labeled `public`, `private`, and `protected` sections within the class body.

- A class can have multiple `public`, `protected`, or `private` labeled sections. Each section remains in effect until either another section label or the closing right brace of the class body is seen. 
- The default access for members and classes is `private`.
## Constructor & Destructor

- A class constructor is a special member function of a class that is executed whenever we create new objects of that class.
- A constructor will have exact same name as the class and it does not have any return type at all, not even void. Constructors can be very useful for setting initial values for certain member variables.
### Parameterized Constructor

- A default constructor does not have any parameter, but if you need, a constructor can have parameters. This helps you to assign initial value to an object at the time of its creation.
### Using Initialization Lists to Initialize Fields

- In case of parameterized constructor, you can use following syntax to initialize the fields:
```cpp
Line::Line( double len)
	: length(len)
{
	cout << "Object is being created, length = " << len << endl;
}
```

- If for a class C, you have multiple fields X, Y, Z, etc., to be initialized, then use can use same syntax and separate the fields by comma as follows:
```cpp
C::C( double a, double b, double c)
	: X(a), Y(b), Z(c)
{
...
}
```
## The Class Destructor

- A ***destructor*** is a special member function of a class that is executed whenever an object of it's class goes out of scope or whenever the delete expression is applied to a pointer to the object of that class.
- A destructor will have exact same name as the class prefixed with a tilde (`~`) and it can neither return a value nor can it take any parameters. Destructor can be very useful for releasing resources before coming out of the program like closing files, releasing memories etc.
## Copy Constructor

- The copy constructor is a constructor which creates an object by initializing it with an object of the same class, which has been created previously. 
- The copy constructor is used to:
	- Initialize one object from another of the same type.
	- Copy an object to pass it as an argument to a function.
	- Copy an object to return it from a function.

- If a copy constructor is not defined in a class, the compiler itself defines one.If the class has pointer variables and has some dynamic memory allocations, then it is a must to have a copy constructor. 
- The most common form of copy constructor is shown here:
```cpp
classname (const classname &obj) {
	// body of constructor
}
```
- Here, obj is a reference to an object that is being used to initialize another object.
## Friend Functions

- A friend function of a class is defined outside that class' scope but it has the right to access all private and protected members of the class. Even though the prototypes for friend functions appear in the class definition, friends are not member functions.
- A friend can be a function, function template, or member function, or a class or class template, in which case the entire class and all of its members are friends.
- To declare a function as a friend of a class, precede the function prototype in the class definition with keyword friend as follows:
```cpp
class Box{
	double width;
	public:
	double length;
	friend void printWidth( Box box );
	void setWidth( double wid );
};
```
## Inline Functions

- C++ inline function is powerful concept that is commonly used with classes. If a function is inline, the compiler places a copy of the code of that function at each point where the function is called at compile time.
- Any change to an inline function could require all clients of the function to be recompiled because compiler would need to replace all the code once again otherwise it will continue with old functionality.

- To inline a function, place the keyword inline before the function name and define the function before any calls are made to the function. The compiler can ignore the inline qualifier in case defined function is more than a line.

- A function definition in a class definition is an inline function definition, even without the use of the inline specifier.
## `this` Pointer

- Every object in C++ has access to its own address through an important pointer called `this` pointer. The `this` pointer is an implicit parameter to all member functions. Therefore, inside a member function, this may be used to refer to the invoking object.
- Friend functions do not have a `this` pointer, because friends are not members of a class. Only member functions have a `this` pointer.
## Pointer to C++ Classes

- A pointer to a C++ class is done exactly the same way as a pointer to a structure and to access members of a pointer to a class you use the **member access operator** `->` operator, just as you do with pointers to structures. 
- Also as with all pointers, you must initialize the pointer before using it.
## Static Members of a Class

- We can define class members static using `static` keyword. When we declare a member of a class as static it means no matter how many objects of the class are created, there is only one copy of the static member.
- A static member is shared by all objects of the class. All static data is initialized to zero when the first object is created, if no other initialization is present.
- We can't put it in the class definition but it can be initialized outside the class.
## Static Function Members

- By declaring a function member as `static`, you make it independent of any particular object of the class. ***A static member function can be called even if no objects of the class exist and the static functions are accessed using only the class name and the scope resolution operator `::`.***

- A static member function can only access static data member, other static member functions and any other functions from outside the class. Static member functions have a class scope and they do not have access to the `this` pointer of the class. You could use a static member function to determine whether some objects of the class have been created or not.