# 3. Basic Syntax

- When we consider a C++ program, it can be defined as a collection of objects that communicate via invoking each other's methods:
	- **Object** - Objects have states and behaviors. Example: A dog has states - color, name, breed as well as behaviors - wagging, barking, and eating. An object is an instance of a class.
	
	- **Class** - A class can be defined as a template/blueprint that describes the behaviors/states that object of its type support.
	
	- **Methods** - A method is basically a behavior. A class can contain many methods. It is in methods where the logic is written, data is manipulated and all the actions are executed.
	
	- **Instant Variables** - Each object has its unique set of instant variables. An object's state is created by the values assigned to these instant variables.
## Semicolons

- In C++, the semicolon is a statement terminator. That is, each individual statement must be ended with a semicolon. It indicates the end of one logical entity.

- C++ does not recognize the end of the line as a terminator. For this reason, it does not matter where you put a statement in a line.
## Blocks in C++

- A block is a set of logically connected statements that are surrounded by opening and closing braces. 
## C++ Identifiers

- A C++ **identifier** is a name used to identify a variable, function, class, module, or any other user-defined item. 
- An identifier starts with a letter A to Z or a to z or an underscore (_) followed by zero or more letters, underscores, and digits (0 to 9).
- C++ does not allow punctuation characters such as @, $, and % within identifiers.
- C++ is a case-sensitive programming language.
## C++ Keywords

- The following list shows the reserved words in C++. These reserved words may not be used as constant or variable or any other identifier names.

|           |                  |          |              |           |          |
| --------- | ---------------- | -------- | ------------ | --------- | -------- |
| asm       | auto             | bool     | break        | case      | catch    |
| char      | class            | const    | const_cast   | continue  | default  |
| delete    | do               | double   | dynamic_cast | else      | enum     |
| explicit  | export           | extern   | false        | float     | friend   |
| goto      | if               | inline   | int          | long      | mutable  |
| namespace | new              | operator | private      | protected | public   |
| register  | reinterpret_cast | return   | short        | signed    | sizeof   |
| static    | static_cast      | struct   | switch       | template  | this     |
| throw     | true             | try      | typedef      | typeid    | typename |
| union     | unsigned         | using    | virtual      | void      | volatile |
| wchar_t   | while            |          |              |           |          |
## Whitespace in C++

- A line containing only whitespace, possibly with a comment, is known as a blank line, and C++ compiler totally ignores it.
- Whitespace is the term used in C++ to describe blanks, tabs, newline characters and comments.
- Whitespace separates one part of a statement from another and enables the compiler to identify where one element in a statement ends and the next element begins.