# 33. Namespaces

- You might be writing some code that has a function called `xyz()` and there is another library available which is also having same function `xyz()`. Now the compiler has no way of knowing which version of `xyz()` function you are referring to within your code.
- A **namespace** is designed to overcome this difficulty and is used as additional information to differentiate similar functions, classes, variables etc. with the same name available in different libraries. Using namespace, you can define the context in which names are defined. In essence, a namespace defines a scope.
## Defining a Namespace

- A namespace definition begins with the keyword `namespace` followed by the namespace name as follows:
```cpp
namespace namespace_name {
	// code declarations
}
```

- To call the namespace-enabled version of either function or variable, prepend (`::`) the namespace name as follows:
```cpp
name::code;  // code could be variable or function.
```

## The *using* directive

- You can also avoid prepending ofnamespaces with the `using namespace` directive. This directive tells the compiler that the subsequent code is making use of names in the specified namespace. The namespace is thus implied for the following code:

- The `using` directive can also be used to refer to a particular item within a `namespace`. For example, if the only part of the `std` namespace that you intend to use is `cout`, you can refer to it as follows:
```cpp
using std::cout;
```

- Subsequent code can refer to `cout` without prepending the namespace, but other items in the `std namespace` will still need to be explicit.

- Names introduced in a `using` directive obey normal scope rules. The name is  visible from the point of the using directive to the end of the scope in which the directive is found. Entities with the same name defined in an outer scope are hidden.

## Discontiguous Namespaces

- A `namespace` can be defined in several parts and so a namespace is made up of the sum of its separately defined parts. The separate parts of a namespace can be spread over multiple files. 
- So, if one part of the namespace requires a name defined in another file, that name must still be declared. Writing a following namespace definition either defines a new namespace or adds new elements to an existing one:
```cpp
namespace namespace_name {
// code declarations
}
```

## Nested Namespaces

- Namespaces can be nested where you can define one `namespace` inside another `namespace` as follows:
```cpp
namespace namespace_name1 {
	// code declarations
	namespace namespace_name2 {
		// code declarations
	}
}
```

You can access members of nested namespace by using resolution operators as follows:
```cpp
// to access members of namespace_name2
using namespace namespace_name1::namespace_name2;
```

```cpp
// to access members of namespace:name1
using namespace namespace_name1;
```