# 6. Variable Types

- A variable provides us with named storage that our programs can manipulate.
- Each variable in C++ has a specific type, which determines the size and layout of the variable's memory; the range of values that can be stored within that memory; and the set of operations that can be applied to the variable.

- The name of a variable can be composed of letters, digits, and the underscore character. 
- It must begin with either a letter or an underscore. 
- Upper and lowercase letters are distinct because C++ is case-sensitive.

- There are following basic types of variable in C++

| Type      | Description                                       |
| --------- | ------------------------------------------------- |
| `bool`    | Stores either value true or false.                |
| `char`    | Typically a single byte. This is an integer type. |
| `int`     | The most natural size of integer for the machine. |
| `float`   | A single-precision floating point value.          |
| `double`  | A double-precision floating point value.          |
| `void`    | Represents the absence of type.                   |
| `wchar_t` | A wide character type.                            |
## Variable Declaration in C++

- A variable declaration provides assurance to the compiler that there is one variable existing with the given type and name so that compiler proceed for further compilation without needing complete detail about the variable. A variable declaration has its meaning at the time of compilation only, compiler needs actual variable declaration at the time of linking of the program.
- A variable declaration is useful when you are using multiple files and you define your variable in one of the files which will be available at the time of linking of the program. You will use `extern` keyword to declare a variable at any place.
- Though you can declare a variable multiple times in your C++ program, but it can be defined only once in a file, a function or a block of code.