# 1. Do Fewer Things

## The First Principle of Slow Productivity

- Doing less can enable better results.
### PRINCIPLE #1: DO FEWER THINGS 
>	Strive to reduce your obligations to the point where you can easily imagine accomplishing them with time to spare. Leverage this reduced load to more fully embrace and advance the small number of projects that matter most.
## Why Knowledge Workers Should Do Fewer Things

- The advantage of doing fewer things is about more than just increasing the raw number of hours dedicated to useful activity; ***the quality of these hours also increases.*** When you approach a project without the hurried need to tend many barely contained fires, you enjoy a more expansive sense of experimentation and possibility.

- ***Our brains work better when we’re not rushing.***

- It’s easy to mistake “do fewer things” as a request to “accomplish fewer things.” But this understanding gets things exactly backward. Whether your task list is overflowing or sparse, you’re still working more or less the same number of hours each week. The size of your list affects only how usefully these hours produce results.

- ***Doing fewer things makes us better at our jobs;*** not only psychologically, but also economically and creatively. Focusing intensely on a small number of tasks, waiting to finish each before bringing on something new, is objectively a much better way to use our brains to produce valuable output.

- In a factory, pushing employees to work longer shifts might be directly more profitable. In knowledge work, by contrast, pushing employees into larger workloads can decrease both the quantity and quality of what they produce. If our workloads were entirely determined by all-powerful managers looking to maximize profits, we might expect, as paradoxical as this sounds at first, to have less on our plates.
 
- ***Doing fewer things is the key to producing good work.***
## Limit Missions

- Missions what ultimately decide where you aim your attention in your job. It’s easy to let your collection of missions expand, as the embrace of a big new goal can be exciting in the moment. But missions, once adopted, demand effort. If your professional life is top heavy, you’ll unavoidably face an onerous workload. Any attempt to succeed with our first principle of slow productivity, therefore, must begin with the reduction of your main objectives.

- It’s hard to specify the optimal number of missions, but generally, ***less is better than more.*** There’s a romance to focusing on a single pursuit, but this level of simplicity is typically accessible only to the most purely creative fields.
## Limit Projects 

- Missions require that you initiate “projects,” which is my term for any work-related initiative that cannot be completed in a single session. Some projects you complete once and then are done. Other projects are ongoing, meaning they unfold without any clear stopping point. Projects create many of the concrete tasks that take up your time during the day. It follows that limiting them is critical to limiting your overall work volume.

- A crude approach to accomplishing this goal is to adopt the persona of someone who is eccentric and unresponsive, eventually driving your colleagues to redirect their requests and assignments elsewhere. 

- "To do real good physics work, you do need absolute solid lengths of time... it needs a lot of concentration... if you have a job administrating anything, you don’t have the time. So I have invented another myth for myself: that I’m irresponsible. I’m actively irresponsible. I tell everybody I don’t do anything." - Richard Fynman

- “Irresponsibility requires eternal vigilance,” Feynman told the Los Angeles Times in a 1986 profile. “And I failed! I wasn’t careful enough when this presidential commission thing came up. I flunked my own principle.” A plan to simply become too unpleasant to be bothered, it seems, isn’t sustainable. There are only so many times you can offer an unqualified no without either losing your job or being sidelined as an unreliable curmudgeon.

- This leaves us with a more nuanced option for limiting projects: appeal to the hard but unimpeachable reality of your actual available time.

- When you say, “I don’t see any really significant swaths of open time to work on something like this for at least three weeks, and in the meantime, I have five other projects competing for my schedule,” it’s hard for someone to rebut you, unless they’re willing to challenge your calculations, or demand that you expand your working hours to accommodate their specific request. 

- To gain this credibility, I recommend, at first, when considering a new project, you estimate how much time it will require and then go find that time and schedule it on your calendar. Block off the hours as you would for a meeting. If you’re unable to find enough blank spaces in your schedule in the near future to easily fit the work, then you don’t have enough time for it.

- Either decline the project, or cancel something else to make room. The power of this approach is that you’re dealing with the reality of your time, not a gut feeling about how busy you are at the moment.

- You don’t have to continue pre-scheduling your projects in this manner indefinitely. After you’ve executed this strategy for a while, you’ll develop an instinct for roughly how many commitments you can maintain at any point without overtaxing your time.
## Limit Daily Goals 

- We’ve arrived at the smallest scale of work that we’ll consider for our limiting strategies: the projects you decide to make progress on during the current day. My recommendation here is simple: work on at most one project per day. 

- ***When it comes to expending efforts on important, bigger initiatives, stay focused on just one target per day.***

- ***Get lost in a single project at a time, obsessing over it until you can release it fully to move on to what came next. ***

- ***There’s a calibrated steadiness to working on just one major initiative a day. Real progress accrues, while anxiety is subdued. This pace might seem slow in the moment, but zooming out to consider the results that eventually accrue over many months reveals the narrowness of this concern.***
## Proposition: Contain the Small 

- ***Taming the impact of small details in your professional life opens up space to pursue bigger goals.***

- Small tasks, in sufficient quantity, can act like productivity termites, destabilizing the whole foundation of what you’re trying to build. It’s worth going to great lengths to tame them. 

- Several of these ideas focus on containing the overhead tax of tasks you cannot avoid tackling. In many cases, it’s not the actual execution of a small commitment that generates distraction, it’s instead the cognitive effort required to remember it, to worry about it, and to eventually find time for it in your schedule. If you can minimize this preparatory effort, you can contain the impact of the task itself. Other ideas will focus on containing tasks by preventing them from arriving on your lists in the first place. In both cases, the goal is limiting damage. 

- ***Slow productivity requires that you free yourself from the constraints of the small so that you can invest more meaningfully in the big. This is a messy, detail-oriented conflict, largely fought on the battleground of old-fashioned productivity tactics and systems. But it’s a battle that must be fought if you hope to, as Benjamin Franklin lauded, become the master of your own time.***
## Put Tasks on Autopilot 

- Once you get used to accomplishing a specific type of task at the same times on the same days, the overhead required for their execution plummets. 

- A key refinement to support this task-centric version of autopilot scheduling is to leverage rituals and locations. If you can connect a regularly recurring task block to a specific location, perhaps paired with a little ritual that helps initiate your efforts, you’re more likely to fall into a regular rhythm of accomplishing this work. 

- I recommend capturing as many categories of regular tasks as possible into an increasingly elaborate autopilot schedule. 

- Containing tasks is not about escaping the small. It’s instead about making these efforts as painless as possible.
## Make Other People Work More

In general, people are often too focused on their own problems to care about how you’re solving your own.
## Avoid Task Engines 

- Most people focus on the difficulty of a project, or the total amount of time it might require. But once you understand the havoc wreaked by an overstuffed to-do list, it makes sense that the task footprint of a project should be taken just as seriously.

- ***Task Engine – an efficient generator of numerous urgent small things to do.***
## Spend Money 

- ***Spend more money on “going pro” with useful software services, instead of “squeezing everything you can out of their freemium editions.”***

- The more you can tame the small commitments pulling at your attention, the more sustainably and effectively you can work on things that matter. 

- But in the long term, this off-loading of the small can provide the mental space needed to make the types of large breakthroughs, and produce the type of value, that will make these monthly expenses suddenly seem trivial in scope. Don’t spend more than you can afford. But recognize that a practitioner of slow productivity cannot afford to spend nothing.
## Proposition: Pull Instead of Push 

- In a push-based process, each stage pushes work onward to the next as soon as it’s done. In a pull-based process, by contrast, each stage pulls in new work only when it’s ready for it.

- Shifting to a pull-based operation made backlogs impossible: the pace of the pipeline would adapt to whatever stage was running slowest.

- ***We often believe those we work with care only about getting results as fast as possible. But this isn’t true. Often what they really want is the ability to hand something off and not have to worry about whether or not it will be accomplished. If they trust you, they’ll give you latitude to finish things on your own terms. Relief, in other words, trumps expediency.***