# 2. Work At A Natural Pace

## The Second Principle of Slow Productivity

- When it comes to our understanding of productivity, timescale matters.

- When viewed at the fast scale of days and weeks, the efforts of historic thinkers like Copernicus and Newton can seem uneven and delayed. When instead viewed at the slow scale of years, their efforts suddenly seem undeniably and impressively fruitful.

- In contemporary work, it became clear, our bias is toward evaluating our efforts at the fast scale.

- The great scientists of past eras would have found our urgency to be self- defeating and frantic. They were interested in what they produced over the course of their lifetimes, not in any particular short-term stretch. Without a manager looking over their shoulder, they didn’t feel pressure to be maximally busy every day. They were instead comfortable taking longer on projects and adopting a more forgiving and variable rhythm to their work.

- In the Nicomachean Ethics, Aristotle identified deep contemplation as the most human and worthy of all activities. The general lifestyle of the scientist, by this logic, had a worthiness of its own, independent of any specific accomplishments in the moment. Little value was to be gained in rushing, as the work itself provided reward.

- The second principle of slow productivity argues that these famous scientists were onto something. Our exhausting tendency to grind without relief, hour after hour, day after day, month after month, is more arbitrary than we recognize.

- We suffer from overly ambitious timelines and poorly managed workloads due to a fundamental uneasiness with ever stepping back from the numbing exhaustion of jittery busyness.

- These scientists point toward an alternative approach to scheduling work in which we give our important efforts more breathing room, allowing them to take longer and unfold with intensity levels that vary over time. This approach is not only more sustainable and humane, it’s also arguably the better long-term strategy for producing results that matter.
### Principle #2: Work At A Natural Pace
> Don’t rush your most important work. Allow it instead to unfold along a sustainable timeline, with variations in intensity, in settings conducive to brilliance.

- Slow productivity emphatically rejects the performative rewards of unwavering urgency. There will always be more work to do. You should give your efforts the breathing room and respect required to make them part of a life well lived, not an obstacle to it.

- Slowing down isn’t about protesting work. It’s instead about finding a better way to do it.
## Why Knowledge Workers Should Return to a More Natural Pace

- Working with unceasing intensity is artificial and unsustainable. In the moment, it might exude a false sense of usefulness, but when continued over time, it estranges us from our fundamental nature, generates misery, and, from a strictly economic perspective, almost certainly holds us back from reaching our full capabilities. A more natural, slower, varied pace to work is the foundation of true productivity in the long term.
## Proposition: Take Longer

- The pseudo-productivity mindset is uncomfortable with spreading out work on an important project, as time not spent hammering on your most important goals seems like time wasted.

- The slow productivity mindset, by contrast, finds advantages to a more languid pace. Frequent cold starts can inject more creativity into your efforts.

- ***Become comfortable taking longer on important projects.***

- The boundary between slow but steady creative production and straight-up procrastination is worrisomely narrow. 

- There’s a reason why a frenetic speed is popular – many people don’t trust themselves to keep returning to a hard project once their initial ardor dissipates.
## Make a Five-Year Plan

- Planning at this scale is certainly necessary, as without it you might end up mired in shallow demands and never really move forward on anything important. I suggest, however, also crafting a plan that covers an even larger scale: ***what you would like to accomplish in the next five years or so.***

- The specific choice of five years is somewhat arbitrary. You can adjust this quantity to fit the reality of your situation. The key to this suggestion, however, is that your time horizon should include at least several years.

- ***The idea that adding more plans to your life can help you slow down might seem paradoxical. The magic here is in the way that this strategy expands the timescales at which you’re evaluating your productivity.***
## Double Your Project Timelines 

- We move now from multiyear plans to rethinking how you organize your work for the next few months. At this seasonal scale, you’re typically planning either complete projects, or milestones from larger pursuits. 

- Your goals at this scale have a significant impact on the speed of your work. If you’re too ambitious, your intensity will remain pegged at a high level as you scramble to try to hit your targets. If you instead give yourself more than enough time to accomplish your objectives, the pace of your work can fall into a more natural groove. A simple heuristic to achieve this latter state is the following: take whatever timelines you first identify as reasonable for upcoming projects, and then double their length. For example, if your initial instinct is to plan for spending two weeks on launching a new website, revise this goal to give yourself a full month.

- A reality of personal productivity is that humans are not great at estimating the time required for cognitive endeavors. We’re wired to understand the demands of tangible efforts, like crafting a hand ax, or gathering edible plants. When it comes to planning pursuits for which we lack physical intuition, however, we’re guessing more than we realize, leading us to gravitate toward best-case scenarios for how long things might take. We seem to seek the thrill that comes from imagining a wildly ambitious timeline during our planning: “Wow, if I could finish four chapters this fall, I’d really be ahead of schedule!” It feels good in the moment but sets us up for scrambling and disappointment in the days that follow.

- By deploying a blanket policy of doubling these initial estimates, you can counter this instinct toward unjustified optimism. The result: plans that can be completed at a more leisurely pace. The fear here, of course, is that by doubling these timelines, you’ll drastically reduce what you accomplish. But your original plans were never realistic or sustainable in the first place. ***A key tenet of slow productivity is that grand achievement is built on the steady accumulation of modest results over time. This path is long. Pace yourself.***
## Simplify Your Workday

- We arrive, finally, at the smallest timescale relevant to our discussion of taking longer: the individual day. One of the central joys of slowing down your work pace is that it frees you from needing to attack every day with frantic intensity.

- To reap this benefit, however, you actually have to simplify your daily schedule. Toning down your seasonal and long-term plans won’t help if you persist in filling every hour of the current day with more work than you can hope to complete. All three timescales must be tamed together.

- Cut back on what you plan to accomplish while increasing your available time.

- Working at a natural pace will still include periods of intense busyness and effort.
## Forgive Yourself

- An important coda to this discussion about taking longer is to acknowledge its psychological perils. Timing work is tricky. Especially when it comes to complicated projects. Sometimes you might let something drag on too long: you miss deadlines or opportunities; you realize you’ve fallen behind on your vision; you imagined you were slowly cultivating a masterpiece, but then one day realize you’ve actually just been procrastinating. It’s tempting to react to these periods of depressed productivity by assigning yourself a penance of crushing busyness. If you’re exhausted, you tell yourself, you can’t be accused of laziness.

- I want to push back on this reaction. Not only is it unsustainable, but it won’t, in the long run, get you any closer to producing work that matters. It’s okay if your efforts to take longer sometimes temporarily lead you off your chosen path. It happens to everyone who has ever tried to accomplish something important.

- This aspect of working at a natural pace is hard to get right, and you will be disappointed from time to time. But the humane response to this reality is obvious: Forgive yourself Then ask, “What’s next?” The key to meaningful work is in the decision to keep returning to the efforts you find important. Not in getting everything right every time.
## Proposition: Embrace Seasonality

- To work without change or rest all year would have seemed unusual to most of our ancestors. Seasonality was deeply integrated into the human experience.
## Schedule Slow Seasons

- I recently heard about this idea of quiet quitting, where, you’re not quitting your job, but quitting the idea of going above and beyond in your work.
## Implement "Small Seasonality"

- Seasonality doesn’t refer only to slowing work for entire seasons. Varying your intensity at smaller timescales can also prove useful in achieving a more natural pace. The general goal for this proposition is to help you avoid working at a constant state of anxious high energy, with little change, throughout the entire year.
## Work in Cycles

- ***Hard leads to fun. The more hardness you face, the more fun you will enjoy soon after.***

- This strategy embraces the natural seasonality of human effort. If you demanded yourself to work with focus and urgency and without break, your overall intensity would drop as exhaustion set in. When instead you regularly take time off between cycles, the work completed within the cycles achieves a higher level of quality. This scenario can end up producing better overall results and It’s also more sustainable.
## Match Your Space To Your Work

- An obvious heuristic for constructing a more effective space for your work is to match elements of your physical surroundings to what it is that you’re trying to accomplish.