# 3. Obsess Over Quality

## The Third Principle of Slow Productivity

- When you concentrate your attention on producing your best possible work, a more humane slowness becomes inevitable. 
### Principle #3: Obsess Over Quality 
> Obsess over the quality of what you produce, even if this means missing opportunities in the short term. Leverage the value of these results to gain more and more freedom in your efforts over the long term.

- ***Quality demands that you slow down. Once achieved, it also helps you take control of your professional efforts, providing you the leverage needed to steer even further away from busyness.***

- There’s a reason why this principle is presented last: ***it’s the glue that holds the practice of slow productivity together.*** Doing fewer things and working at a natural pace are both absolutely necessary components of this philosophy, but if those earlier principles are implemented on their own, without an accompanying obsession with quality, they might serve only to fray your relationship to work over time – casting your professional efforts as an imposition that you must tame. It’s in the obsession over what you’re producing that slowness can transcend its role as just one more strategy on the arid battlegrounds of work-life wars and become a necessary imperative – an engine that drives a meaningful professional life.
## Why Knowledge Workers Should Obsess Over Quality

- Most of us don’t do just one thing on which our professional performance is assessed. The sine qua non of knowledge work is instead the juggling of many different objectives.

- Even in knowledge work, however, if we look closer, we can often find hidden among our busy to-do lists one or two core activities that really matter most.

- The third and final principle of slow productivity asks that you obsess over the quality of the core activities in your professional life.

- Obsessing over quality often demands that you slow down, as the focus required to get better is simply not compatible with busyness.

- “Deciding what not to do is as important as deciding what to do” ~ Steve Jobs

- A little quality work every day will produce more and more satisfying results than frantic work piled on top of frantic work.

- The first principle of slow productivity argues that you should do fewer things because overload is neither a humane nor pragmatic approach to organizing your work. This third principle’s focus on quality, however, transforms professional simplicity from an option to an imperative. Once you commit to doing something very well, busyness becomes intolerable. In other words, this third principle helps you stick with the first.

- The marketplace doesn’t care about your personal interest in slowing down. If you want more control over your schedule, you need something to offer in return. More often than not, your best source of leverage will be your own abilities.

- We’ve become so used to the idea that the only reward for getting better is moving toward higher income and increased responsibilities that we forget that the fruits of pursuing quality can also be harvested in the form of a more sustainable lifestyle.
## Proposition: Improve Your Taste 

- "All of us who do creative work, we get into it because we have good taste... But it’s like there’s a gap. That for the first couple years that you’re making stuff, what you’re making, isn’t so good... it’s not quite that good... If you’re just starting off and you’re entering into that phase, you gotta know it’s totally normal and the most important possible thing you can do is do a lot of work... Put yourself on a deadline so that every week or every month you know you’re gonna finish one application... It’s only by actually going through a volume of work that you’re actually going to catch up and close that gap, and the work you’re making will be as good as your ambitions."

- Glass correctly identifies “taste” as critical for achieving quality. The act of creation can be decomposed into a series of spontaneous eruptions of new possibilities, which must then be filtered against some ineffable understanding of what works and what doesn’t - the visceral intuition that we call taste.

- In his exposition, Glass focuses on the gap that often exists between taste and ability - especially early on in a creative career. It’s easier to learn to recognize what’s good than to master the skills required to meet this standard.

- It’s in our desire to diminish the distance between our taste and our ability – that improvement happens. His exhortation to those just beginning their careers is to keep putting in the work, as it’s only through this deliberate effort that the gap will close.

- Also your success will came not only from a drive to meet your own high standards, but also from your efforts to improve those standards over time.

- No amount of grinding will lead to brilliance if you don’t yet have a good understanding of what brilliance could mean in your chosen field.
## Start Your Own Group 

- When you gather with other people who share similar professional ambitions, the collective taste of the group can be superior to that of any individual. This follows, in part, from the diversity of approaches that people take toward creation in a given field. When you combine the opinions of multiple practitioners of your craft, more possibilities and nuance emerge. There’s also a focusing effect that comes from performing for a crowd. When you want to impress other people, or add to the conversations in a meaningful way, your mind slips into a higher gear than what’s easily accessible in solo introspection. Forming a group of like-minded professionals, all looking to improve what they’re doing, provides a shortcut to improving your taste, an instantaneous upgrade to the standard of quality that you’re pursuing.
## Buy Quality

- The general idea that quality tools can increase the quality of your work. 

- It’s true that these more expensive tools include more features than their cheaper counterparts, but the ***“I’m a professional now”*** vibe they induce is arguably just as valuable. 

- ***We also see these dynamics at play when computer programmers set up elaborate digital workstations featuring two or three monitors. These programmers will swear that the ability to see multiple windows at once increases productivity. Part of the power of these setups is found in their complexity, which puts the user in a specialized mindset, ready to do the hard work of writing efficient programs.***

- The pursuit of quality is not a casual endeavor. If you want your mind on board with your plans to evolve your abilities, then investing in your tools is a good way to start.
## Interlude: What about Perfectionism?

- Obsession can be paralyzing. Quality matters, but if it becomes everything, you may never finish.

- ***Obsession requires you to get lost in your head, convinced that you can do just a little bit better given some more time. Greatness requires the ability to subsequently pull yourself out of your self-critical reverie before it’s too late.***

- ***Give yourself enough time to produce something great, but not unlimited time. Focus on creating something good enough to catch the attention of those whose taste you care about, but relieve yourself of the need to forge a masterpiece. Progress is what matters. Not perfection.***
## Proposition: Bet on Yourself

- Betting on yourself with nontrivial stakes for failure but attractive rewards for success is a good general strategy for pushing the quality of your work to a new level.

- Simply by placing yourself in a situation where there exists pressure to succeed, even if moderate, can provide an important accelerant in your quest for quality.

- The goal in betting on yourself is to push yourself to a new level without accidentally also pushing yourself into an unnaturally busy workload.
## Announce A Schedule

- Dedicating time or sacrificing money for a project are two obvious bets to push you toward higher-quality work. A natural third option is to leverage your social capital. If you announce your work in advance to people you know, you’ll have created expectations. If you fail to produce something notable, you’ll pay a social cost in terms of embarrassment. Not surprisingly, this, too, can act as a powerful motivator.