# 11. Pointers

- Objects reside in memory. And so far, we have learned how to access and manipulate objects through variables. Another way to access an object in memory is through pointers. Each object in memory occupies a certain amount of bytes and has a type and an address. This allows us to access the object through a pointer.
- So, pointers are types that can hold the address of a particular object.
- For illustrative purposes only, we will declare an unutilized pointer that can point to an int object:
```cpp
int main(){
	int* p;
}
```

- We say that `p` is of type `int*`.

- In our first example, we declared a pointer of type `int*`. To make it point to an existing `int` object in memory, we use the ***address-of operator `&`***. We say that `p` points to `x`.
```cpp
int main(){
	int x = 123;
	int* p = &x;
}
```

- To initialize a pointer that does not point to any object, we can use the `nullptr` literal:
```cpp
int main(){
	char* p = nullptr;
}
```

- It is said that `p` is now a null pointer.

- Pointers are variables/objects, just like any other type of object. Their value is the address of an object, a memory location where the object is stored. To access a value stored in an object pointed to by a pointer, we need to dereference a pointer.
- Dereferencing is done by prepending a pointer (variable) name with a dereferencing operator `*`:
```cpp
int main(){
	char c = 'a';
	char* p = &c;
	char d = *p;
}
```

- We can change the value of the pointed-to object through a dereferenced pointer:
```cpp
#include <iostream>
int main(){
	int x = 123;
	int* p = &x;
	*p = 456; // change the value of pointed-to object
	std::cout << "The value of x is: " << x;
}
```

- We will talk about pointers, and especially about smart pointers, when we cover the concepts such as dynamic memory allocation and the lifetime of an object.