# 13. Introduction to Strings

-  The C++ Standard Library offers a compound type called `string` or rather `std::string`. We use it for storing and manipulating strings.
## Defining a String

- To use the `std::string` type, we need to include the `<string>` header in our program:
```cpp
#include <string>
int main() {
	std::string s = "Hello World.";
}
```
## Concatenating Strings

- We can add a string literal to our string using the compound operator `+=`.
- We can add a character to our string using the `+=` operator.
- We can add another string to our string using the `+` operator. 

- Internally, the type `std::string` is the so-called class template. It is implemented using templates.
## Accessing Characters

- Individual characters of a string can be accessed through a subscript operator `[ ]` or via a member function `.at(index)`. The index starts at `0`.
- Example:
```cpp
#include <iostream>
#include <string>

int main(){
	std::string s = "Hello World.";
	char c1 = s[0]; // 'H'
	char c2 = s.at(0); // 'H';
	char c3 = s[6]; // 'W'
	char c4 = s.at(6); // 'W';
	std::cout << "First character: " << c1 << ", sixth character: " << c3;
}
```
## Comparing Strings

- A string can be compared to string literals and other strings using the equality `==` operator.
## String Input

- The preferred way of accepting a string from the standard input is via the `std::getline` function, which takes `std::cin` and our string as parameters:
```cpp
#include <iostream>
#include <string>

int main(){
	std::string s;
	std::cout << "Please enter a string: ";
	std::getline(std::cin, s);
	std::cout << "You entered: " << s;
}
```

- We use the `std::getline` because our string can contain white spaces. And if we used the `std::cin` function alone, it would accept only a part of the string.

- The `std::getline` function has the following signature: `std::getline(read_from, into);`.
- The function reads a line of text from the standard input (`std::cin`) into a string (s) variable.
- A rule of thumb: If we need to use the `std::string` type, include the `<string>` header explicitly.

## A Pointer to a String

- A string has a member function `.c_str()` which returns a pointer to its first element. It is also said it returns a pointer to a null-terminated character array our string is made of:
```cpp
#include <iostream>
#include <string>

int main(){
	std::string s = "Hello World.";
	std::cout << s.c_str();
}
```

- This member function is of type `const char*` and is useful when we want to pass our `std::string` variable to a function accepting a `const char*` parameter.
## Substrings

- We use the `.substr()` member function to create a substring from a `string`. The function returns a substring that starts at a certain position in the main string and is of a certain length. The signature of the function is `.substring(starting_position, length)`. 
## Finding a Substring

- To find a substring in a string, we use the `.find()` member function. It searches for the substring in a string. If the substring is found, the function returns the position of the first found substring. This position is the position of a character where the substring starts in the main string. If the substring is not found, the function returns a value that is `std::string::npos`. The function itself is of type `std::string::size_type`.

- To find a substring “Hello” inside the “This is a Hello World string” string, we write
```cpp
#include <iostream>
#include <string>

int main()
{
	std::string s = "This is a Hello World string.";
	std::string stringtofind = "Hello";
	std::string::size_type found = s.find(stringtofind);
	
	if (found != std::string::npos){
		std::cout << "Substring found at position: " << found;
	}
	else{
		std::cout << "The substring is not found.";
	}
}
```

- Here, we have the main string and a substring we want to find. We supply the substring to the `.find()` function as an argument. We store the function’s return value to a variable found. Then we check the value of this variable. If the value is not equal to `std::string::npos`, the substring is found. We print the message and the position of a character in the main string where our substring was found.