# 16. Statements

- Statements are commands, pieces of code that are executed in some order. 
- Expressions ending with a semicolon are statements.
- The C++ language also comes with some built-in statements. We will start with the selection statements.
## Selection Statements

- Selection statements allow us to execute the appropriate statements based on some given condition.
### if Statement

- When we want to execute a statement or more statements based on some condition, we use the if statement. 
- The if statement has the format of
```cpp
if (condition) statement(s)
```

- The statement(s) part executes only if the condition is true.
- To execute multiple statements if the condition is true, we use the block scope {}:

- Another form is the if-else statement:
```cpp
if (condition) statement(s) else other_statement(s)
```
- If the condition is true, the first statement(s) executes. Otherwise, the second `other_statement(s)` after the else keyword executes.

- It is good practice to use the code blocks {} inside the if statement branches, even if there is only one statement to be executed.
### Conditional Expression

- An expression that returns a value based on a condition is called a conditional expression.
- The conditional expression is of the following syntax:
```cpp
(condition) ? expression_1 : expression_2
```

- The conditional expression uses the unary ? operator, which checks the value of the condition. If the condition is true, it returns `expression_1`. If the condition is false, it returns `expression_2`. 
- It can be thought of as a way of replacing a simple if-else statement with a one-liner.
### The Logical Operators

- The logical operators perform logical and, or, and negation operations on their operands.

- The first is the && operator, which is a logical AND operator. 
- The result of a logical AND condition with two operands is true if both operands are true.

- The next operator is ||, which is a logical OR operator. 
- The result of a logical OR expression is always true except when both operands are false.

- The next logical operator is the negation operator, represented by a ! symbol.
- It negates the value of its only right-hand-side operand. It turns the value of true to false and vice versa.
### Comparison Operators

- Comparison operators allow us to compare the values of operands. Comparison operators are less than <, less than or equal to <=, greater than >, greater than or equal to >=, equal to == , and not equal to !=.

- Any literal, object or expression, implicitly convertible to true or false, can be used as a condition.
- If we use an integer variable with a value other than 0, the result will be true:

### switch Statement

- The switch statement is similar to having multiple if statements. It checks the value of the condition (which must be an integral or enum value) and, based on that value, executes the code inside one of a given set of case: labels. If none of the case statements is equal to the condition, the code inside the default: label is executed. 
- General syntax:
```cpp
switch (condition){
	case value1:
		statement(s);
		break;
	case value2etc:
		statement(s);
		break;
	default:
		statement(s);
		break;
}
```

- The break statement exits the entire switch statement. If there were no break statements, the code would fall through to the next case statement and execute the code there regardless of the x value. We need to put breaks in all the case: and default: switches.
## Iteration Statements

- If we need some code to execute multiple times, we use iteration statements. Iteration statements are statements that execute some code in a loop. The code in the loop executes zero, one, or multiple times, depending on the statement and the condition.
### for Statement

- The for statement executes code in a loop. The execution depends on the condition. 
- The general syntax of the for statement is
```c++
for (init_statement; condition; iteration_expression)
{ statement(s) }
```
### while Statement

- The while statement executes code as long as the condition is true. 
- The syntax for the while loop is 
```cpp
while (condition) { // execute some code }
```

- As long as the condition is true, the while loop will continue executing the code. When the condition becomes false, the while loop terminates.
### do Statement

- The do statement is similar to the while statement, but the condition comes after the body. 
- The code inside the do statement is guaranteed to execute at least once. 
- The syntax is
```cpp
do {
// execute some code 
} while (condition);
```

- The do statement is rarely used and better avoided. Please note that there is also an iteration statement called the range-for statement. We will talk about it when we explain the containers later on.