# 19. Functions

## Introduction

- A function has a return type, a name, a list of parameters in a declaration, and an additional function body in a definition. 
- A simple function definition is:
```cpp
type function_name(arguments) {
	statement(s);
	return something;
}
```
## Function Declaration

- To declare a function, we need to specify a return type, a name, and a list of parameters, if any. 
- To declare a function called myfunction of type `void` that accepts no parameters, we write:
```cpp
void myvoidfunction();

int main()
{
}
```

- Type `void` is a type that represents nothing, an empty set of values.

- In function declaration only, we can also omit the parameter names, but we need to specify their types:
```cpp
int mysum(int, int);

int main(){
}
```
## Function Definition

- To be called in a program, a function must be defined first. A function definition has everything a function declaration has, plus the body of a function.

- What we pass into a function is referred to as a ***function argument***.

- To call a function that accepts arguments, we use the function name followed by an opening parenthesis, followed by a list of arguments separated by commas, and, finally, closing parentheses.
## Return Statement

- Functions are of a certain type, also referred to as a return type, and they must return a value. The value returned is specified by a return statement. Functions of type void do not need a return statement.
- Functions of other, nonvoid types (except function main) need a `return` statement.

- A function can have multiple `return` statements if needed, but only one of those statements will be executed. Once any of the `return` statement is executed, the function exits and returns the control flow to the caller, and the rest of the code in the function is ignored.
## Passing Arguments

- There are different ways of passing arguments to a function. Here, we will describe the three most used.
### Passing by Value/Copy

- When we pass an argument to a function, a copy of that argument is made and passed to the function if the function parameter type is not a reference. This means the value of the original argument does not change. An internal copy of the argument is made, and the function works with that copy. 
### Passing by Reference

- When a function parameter type is a reference type, then the actual argument is passed to the function, not a copy of that argument. The function can now modify the value of the argument.
- Passing by reference is best avoided.
### Passing by Const Reference

- What is preferred (for arguments of complex types) is passing an argument by `const` reference, also referred to as a reference to `const`. It can be more efficient to pass an argument by reference, but to ensure it is not changed, we make it of const reference type.
- Example:
```cpp
#include <iostream>
#include <string>

void myfunction(const std::string& byconstreference){
	std::cout << "An argument passed by const reference: " << byconstreference;
}

int main(){
	std::string s = "Hello World!";
	myfunction(s);
}
```

- We use passing by `const` reference for efficiency reasons, and the `const` modifier ensures the value of an argument will not be changed.
- In the last examples, we omitted the function declarations and only supplied the function definitions. Although a function definition is also a declaration, you should provide both the declaration and a definition.
## Function Overloading

- We can have multiple functions with the same name but with different parameter types. This is called ***function overloading.*** 
- When calling our functions, a proper overload is selected based on the type of argument we supply.