# 21. Scope and Lifetime

- When we declare a variable, its name is valid only inside some sections of the source code. And that section (part, portion, region) of the source code is called scope. It is the region of code in which the name can be accessed. There are different scopes.
## Local Scope

- When we declare a name inside a function, that name has a local scope. Its scope starts from the point of declaration till the end of the function block marked with `}`.
## Block Scope

- The block scope is a section of code marked by a block of code starting with `{` and ending with `}`.

- There are other scopes as well, which we will cover later in the book. It is important to introduce the notion of scope at this point to explain the object’s lifetime.
## Lifetime

- The lifetime of an object is the time an object spends in memory. The lifetime is determined by a so-called storage duration. There are different kinds of storage durations.
### Automatic Storage Duration

- The automatic storage duration is a duration where memory for an object is automatically allocated at the beginning of a block and deallocated when the code block ends. 
- This is also called ***stack memory***; objects are allocated on the stack. 
- In this case, the object’s lifetime is determined by its scope. 
- All local objects have this storage duration.
### Dynamic Storage Duration

- The dynamic storage duration is a duration where memory for an object is manually allocated and manually deallocated. 
- This kind of storage is often referred to as ***heap*** ***memory.*** 
- The user determines when the memory for an object will be allocated and when it will be released. The lifetime of an object is not determined by the scope in which the object was defined. 
- We do it through operator `new` and ***smart pointers***. 
- In modern C++, we should prefer the smart pointer facilities to operator `new`.
### Static Storage Duration

- When an object declaration is prepended with a `static` specifier, it means the storage for a `static` object is allocated when the program starts and deallocated when the program ends. 
- There is only one instance of such objects, and (with a few exceptions) their lifetime ends when a program ends. They are objects we can access at any given time during the execution of a program.
### Operators `new` and `delete`

- We can dynamically allocate and deallocate storage for our object and have pointers point to this newly allocated memory.
- The operator new allocates space for an object. The object is allocated on the free store, often called ***heap or heap memory***. 
- The allocated memory must be deallocated using the operator `delete`. It deallocates the memory previously allocated with an operator `new`.

- If we want to allocate memory for an array, we use the operator `new[]`. To deallocate a memory allocated for an array, we use the operator `delete[]`. 
- Pointers and arrays are similar and can often be used interchangeably. Pointers can be dereferenced by a subscript operator `[]`.

- ***Remember***: Prefer smart pointers to operator `new`.