# 23. Classes – Introduction

- A class is a user-defined type. It consists of members. The members are data members and member functions.
- A class can be described as data and some functionality on that data, wrapped into one.
- An instance of a class is called an ***object***.
- To only declare a class name, we write
```cpp
class MyClass;
```

- To define an empty class, we add a `class` body marked by braces `{}`:
```cpp
class MyClass{};
```

- To create an instance of the `class`, an object, we use:
```cpp
class MyClass{};
int main(){
	MyClass o;
}
```
## Data Member Fields

- A class can have a set of some data in it. These are called ***member fields***. 
## Member Functions

- Similarly, a class can store functions. These are called member functions. They are mostly used to perform some operations on data fields.

- There are two ways to define this member function. The first is to define it inside the class (body):
```cpp
class MyClass{
	void dosomething(){
		std::cout << "Hello World from a class.";
	}
};
```

- The second one is to define it outside the class. In that case, we write the function type first, followed by a class name, followed by a scope resolution `::` operator, followed by a function name, a list of parameters, if any, and a function body:
```cpp
class MyClass{
	void dosomething();
	};

void MyClass::dosomething(){
	std::cout << "Hello World from a class.";
}
```
## Access Specifiers

- Wouldn’t it be convenient if there was a way we could disable access to member fields but allow access to member functions for our object and other entities accessing our class members? To place the code (of a class) into different levels of visibility? And that is what access specifiers are for. They specify access/visibility levels for class members.
- There are three access specifiers – `public`, `protected`, and `private`:
```cpp
class MyClass{
	public:
		// everything in here
		// has public access level
	protected:
		// everything in here
		// has protected access level
	private:
		// everything in here
		// has private access level
};
```

- The default visibility/access specifier for a class is `private` if none of the access specifiers is present:
```cpp
class MyClass{
	// everything in here
	// has private access by default
};
```

- Another way to write a `class` is to write a `struct`. A `struct` is also a `class` in which members have `public` access by default. So, a `struct` is the same thing as a class but with a `public` access specifier by default:
```cpp
struct MyStruct{
	// everything in here
	// is public by default
};
```

- Public access members are accessible anywhere. For example, they are accessible to other class members and to objects of our class. 
- To access a class member from an object, we use the ***dot `.` operator.***

- We said there are three different visibility levels (access specifiers) for a code inside a class. They are `private`, `protected`, and `public`. From whose perspective?
- From the perspective of three different actors:
	- A `class` itself
	- A derived class
	- An object of a class

- A class itself can see and access any code inside a class, regardless of the visibility level.
- A derived class can see and access only code inside a `public` and `protected` region.
- An object of a class can see and access only code inside a `public` area.

- Member fields always have access to each other regardless of the access specifier.
- Private access members are accessible only to other class members (other code inside a class), not objects of a class.

- We want the data members to have `private` access and function members to have `public` access. This way, our object can access the member functions directly but not the member fields. 
- There is another access specifier called `protected:` which we will talk about later in the book when we learn about inheritance.
## Constructors

- A constructor is a member function that has the same name as the class. 
- The constructor’s purpose is to initialize an object of a class. It constructs an object and can set values to data members. If a class has a constructor, all objects of that class will be initialized by a constructor call. In short, when an object is created, a code inside the constructor runs.
## Default Constructor

- A constructor without parameters or with default parameters set is called a default constructor. It is a constructor which can be called without arguments:
```CPP
#include <iostream>
class MyClass{
	public:
	MyClass(){
		std::cout << "Default constructor invoked." << '\n';
	}
};

int main(){
	MyClass o; // invoke a default constructor
}
```

- If a default constructor is not explicitly defined in the code, the compiler will generate a default constructor. But when we define a constructor of our own, the one that needs parameters, the default constructor gets removed and is not generated by a compiler.

- Constructors are invoked when object initialization takes place. They can’t be invoked directly. 
- Constructors can have an arbitrary number of parameters, in which case we can call them user-provided constructors.

- Constructors do not have a `return` type, they have the same name as the class, and their purpose is to initialize the object of their class.
## Member Initialization

- In our previous example, we used a constructor body and assignments to assign value to each class member. A better, more efficient way to initialize an object of a class is to use the constructor’s member initializer list in the definition of the constructor:
```cpp
#include <iostream>
class MyClass{
	public:
		int x, y;
		
		MyClass(int xx, int yy)
			: x{ xx }, y{ yy } // member initializer list
		{
		}
};

int main()
{
MyClass o{ 1, 2 }; // invoke a user-defined constructor
std::cout << o.x << ' ' << o.y;
}
```

- A member initializer list starts with a colon, followed by member names and their initializers, where each initialization expression is separated by a comma. 
- This is the preferred way of initializing class data members.
## Copy Constructor

- When we initialize an object of the class with another object of the same class, we invoke a copy constructor. If we do not supply our copy constructor, the compiler generates a default copy constructor that performs the so-called shallow copy. 
- Example:
```cpp
class MyClass{
	private:
		int x, y;
	public:
		MyClass(int xx, int yy) : x{ xx }, y{ yy }
		{
		}
};

int main(){
	MyClass o1{ 1, 2 };
	MyClass o2 = o1; // default copy constructor invoked
}
```
 - In this example, we initialize the object o2 with the object o1 of the same type. This invokes the default copy constructor.
 
 - We can provide our own copy constructor. The copy constructor has a special parameter signature of `MyClass(const MyClass& rhs)`. 
 - Here’s an example of a user-­defined copy constructor:
```cpp
#include <iostream>

class MyClass{
	private:
		int x, y;
	public:
		MyClass(int xx, int yy) : x{ xx }, y{ yy }
	{
	}
	// user defined copy constructor
	MyClass(const MyClass& rhs)
		: x{ rhs.x }, y{ rhs.y } // initialize members with other object's
		// members
	{
		std::cout << "User-defined copy constructor invoked.";
	}
};

int main(){
	MyClass o1{ 1, 2 };
	MyClass o2 = o1; // user defined copy constructor invoked
}
```

- Here, we defined our own copy constructor in which we explicitly initialized data members with other objects’ data members, and we printed out a simple message on the console/standard output.

- Please note that the default copy constructor does not correctly copy members of some types, such as pointers, arrays, etc. In order to make copies properly, we need to define our own copy logic inside the copy constructor. This is referred to as a ***deep copy.***
- For pointers, for example, we need to both create a pointer and assign a value to the object it points to in our user-defined copy constructor:
```cpp
#include <iostream>

class MyClass{
	private:
		int x;
		int* p;
	public:
		MyClass(int xx, int pp)
			: x{ xx }, p{ new int{pp} }
		{
		}
		MyClass(const MyClass& rhs)
			: x{ rhs.x }, p{ new int {*rhs.p} }
		{
			std::cout << "User-defined copy constructor invoked.";
		}
};

int main(){
	MyClass o1{ 1, 2 };
	MyClass o2 = o1; // user defined copy constructor invoked
}
```

- Here, we have two constructors: one is a user-provided regular constructor, and the other is a user-defined copy constructor. The first constructor initializes an object and is invoked here: `MyClass o1{ 1, 2 }`; in our main function.
- The second, user-defined copy constructor is invoked here: `MyClass o2 = o1;`. This constructor now properly copies the values from both `int` and `int*` member fields.

- In this example, we have pointers as member fields. If we had left out the user-defined copy constructor and relied on a default copy constructor, only the int member field would be properly copied, and the pointer would not. In this example, we rectified that.
- In addition to copying, there is also a ***move semantic***, where data is moved from one object to the other. This semantic is represented through a ***move constructor*** and a ***move assignment*** operator.
## Copy Assignment

- So far, we have used copy constructors to initialize one object with another object. We can also copy the values to an object after it has been initialized/created. We use a copy assignment for that. Simply, when we initialize an object with another object using the `=` operator on the same line, then the copy operation uses the copy constructor:
``` cpp
MyClass copyfrom;
MyClass copyto = copyfrom; // on the same line, uses a copy constructor
```

- When an object is created on one line and then assigned to in the next line, it then uses the copy assignment operator to copy the data from another object:
```cpp
MyClass copyfrom;
MyClass copyto;
copyto = copyfrom; // uses a copy assignment operator
```

- A copy assignment operator is of the following signature:
```cpp
MyClass& operator=(const MyClass& rhs)
```

- To define a user-defined copy assignment operator inside a class, we use
```cpp
class MyClass{
	public:
		MyClass& operator=(const MyClass& rhs){
			// implement the copy logic here
			return *this;
		}
};
```

- Notice that the overloaded operators having the `=` symbol must return a dereferenced `this` pointer at the end. To define a user-defined copy assignment operator outside the class, we use
```cpp
class MyClass{
	public:
		MyClass& operator=(const MyClass& rhs);
	};

MyClass& MyClass::operator=(const MyClass& rhs){
	// implement the copy logic here
	return *this;
}
```

 - Similarly, there is a move assignment operator, which we will discuss later in the book. 
 - More on operator overloading in the following chapters.
## Move Constructor

- In addition to copying, we can also move the data from one object to the other. We call it a ***move semantics***. Move semantics is achieved through a move constructor and move assignment operator. The object from which the data was moved is left in some valid but unspecified state. The move operation is efficient in terms of speed of execution, as we do not have to make copies.

- Move constructor accepts something called ***rvalue reference*** as an argument.
- Every expression can find itself on the left-hand side or the right-hand side of the assignment operator. The expressions that can be used on the left-hand side are called lvalues, such as variables, function calls, class members, etc. The expressions that can be used on the right-hand side of an assignment operator are called rvalues, such as literals and other expressions.
- Now the move semantics accepts a reference to that rvalue. The signature of an rvalue reference type is `T&&`, with double reference symbols. So, the signature of a move constructor is
```cpp
MyClass (MyClass&& rhs)
```

- To cast something to an rvalue reference, we use the `std::move` function. This function casts the object to an rvalue reference. It does not move anything. Here’s an example where a move constructor is invoked:
```cpp
#include <iostream>
class MyClass { };

int main(){
	MyClass o1;
	MyClass o2 = std::move(o1);   // or MyClass o2{std::move(o1)};
	std::cout << "Move constructor invoked.";

}
```

- In this example, we define an object of type MyClass called o1. Then we initialize the second object o2 by moving everything from object o1 to o2. To do that, we need to cast the o2 to an rvalue reference with `std::move(o1)`. This, in turn, invokes the MyClass move constructor for o2.
- If a user does not provide a move constructor, the compiler provides an implicitly generated default move constructor.
## Move Assignment

- The move assignment operator is invoked when we declare an object and then try to assign an rvalue reference to it. This is done via the move assignment operator.
- The signature of the move assignment operator is 
```cpp
MyClass& operator=(MyClass&& otherobject).
```

- To define a user-defined move assignment operator inside a class, we use
```cpp
class MyClass{
public:
	MyClass& operator=(MyClass&& otherobject){
		// implement the copy logic here
		return *this;
	}
};
```

- As with any assignment operator overloading, we must return a dereferenced this pointer at the end.

 - To define a move assignment operator outside the class, we use
```cpp
class MyClass{
public:
	MyClass& operator=(MyClass&& rhs);
};

MyClass& MyClass::operator=(MyClass&& rhs){
	// implement the copy logic here
	return *this;
}
```
## Operator Overloading

- Objects of classes can be used in an expression as operands. For example, we can do the following:
```cpp
myobject = otherobject;
myobject + otherobject;
myobject / otherobject;
myobject++;
++myobject;
```

- Here, objects of a class are used as operands. To do that, we need to overload the operators for complex types such as classes. It is said that we need to overload them to provide a meaningful operation on objects of a class. Some operators can be overloaded for classes; some cannot. 
- We can overload the following operators – arithmetic, binary, boolean, unary, comparison, compound, function, and subscript operators:
```bash
+ - * / % ^ & | ~ ! = < > == != <= >= += -= *= /= %= ^= &= |= << >> >>= <<= && || ++ -- , ->* -> () []
```

- Each operator carries its signature and set of rules when overloading for classes. Some operator overloads are implemented as member functions and some as freestanding functions.

- We can also invoke an operator by calling `.operatoractual_operator_name(parameters_if_any);` such as `.operator++();`.

- Please do not worry too much about the somewhat inconsistent rules for operator overloading. Remember, each (set of ) operator has its own rules for overloading.

- When we need to perform arithmetic, logic, and other operations on our objects of a class, we need to overload the appropriate operators. There are rules and signatures for overloading each operator. Some operators can be implemented in terms of other operators.
- We do not have to learn all the operator overloading rules by heart. We should simply look them up. For a complete list of operator overloading rules, please refer to the C++ reference at: https://en.cppreference.com/w/cpp/language/operators.
## Destructors

- As we saw earlier, a constructor is a member function that gets invoked when the object is initialized. 
- Similarly, a destructor is a member function that gets invoked when an object is destroyed.
- The signature of the destructor starts with a tilde `~` followed by a class name:
```cpp
class MyClass{
public:
	MyClass() {} // constructor
	~MyClass() {} // destructor
};
```

- A destructor takes no parameters, and there is one destructor per class. 

- Destructors are invoked when an object goes out of scope or when a pointer to an object is deleted. We should not call the destructor directly.
- Destructors can be used to clean up the allocated resources. 

- we allocate memory for a pointer in the constructor and deallocate the memory in the destructor. This style of resource allocation/deallocation is called ***RAII or Resource Acquisition Is Initialization.*** Destructors should not be called directly.