# 25. Classes – Inheritance and Polymorphism

## Inheritance

- We can build a class from an existing class. It is said that a class can be derived from an existing class. This is known as ***inheritance*** and is one of the pillars of object-oriented programming.
-  To derive a class from an existing class, we write:
```cpp
class MyDerivedClass : public MyBaseClass {};
```

- In this example, MyDerivedClass inherits the MyBaseClass.
- The derived class and objects of a derived class can access public members of a base class.

- The following example introduces the new access specifier called `protected:`. The derived class itself can access `protected` members of a base class. The `protected` access specifier allows access to the base class and derived class but not to objects:
```cpp
class MyBaseClass{
protected:
	char c;
	int x;
};

class MyDerivedClass : public MyBaseClass{
	// c and x also accessible here
};

int main(){
	MyDerivedClass o;
	o.c = 'a'; // Error, not accessible to an object
	o.x = 123; // error, not accessible to an object
}
```

- The derived class cannot access `private` members of a base class:
```cpp
class MyBaseClass{
private:
	char c;
	int x;
};

class MyDerivedClass : public MyBaseClass{
	// c and x NOT accessible here
};

int main(){
	MyDerivedClass o;
	o.c = 'a'; // Error, not accessible to object
	o.x = 123; // error, not accessible to object
}
```

- The derived class inherits `public` and `protected` base class members and can introduce its own new members. Here’s a simple example:
```cpp
class MyBaseClass{
public:
	char c;
	int x;
};

class MyDerivedClass : public MyBaseClass{
public:
	double d;
};

int main(){
	MyDerivedClass o;
	o.c = 'a';
	o.x = 123;
	o.d = 456.789;
}
```

- Here, we inherited everything from the MyBaseClass class and introduced a new member field in MyDerivedClass called d. So, with MyDerivedClass, we are extending the capability of MyBaseClass. The field `d` only exists in MyDerivedClass and is accessible to the derived class and its objects. It is not accessible to MyBaseClass class as it does not exist there.

- Please note that there are other ways of inheriting a class, such as through `protected` and `private` inheritance, but the `public` inheritance, such as `class MyDerivedClass : public MyBaseClass`, is the most widely used, and we will stick to that one for now.
- A derived class itself can be a base class.
## Polymorphism

- It is said that the derived class is a base class. Its type is compatible with the base class type. Also, a pointer to a derived class is compatible with a pointer to the base class.
- Together with inheritance, this is used to achieve the functionality known as ***polymorphism***. Polymorphism means the object can morph into different types.

- Polymorphism in C++ is achieved through an interface known as ***virtual Functions***. 
- A ***virtual function*** is a function whose behaviour can be overridden in subsequent derived classes. And our pointer/object morphs into different types to invoke the appropriate function. 
- Example:
```cpp
#include <iostream>

class MyBaseClass{
public:
	virtual void dowork(){
		std::cout << "Hello from a base class." << '\n';
	}
};

class MyDerivedClass : public MyBaseClass{
	public:
	void dowork(){
		std::cout << "Hello from a derived class." << '\n';
	}
};

int main(){
	MyBaseClass* o = new MyDerivedClass;
	o->dowork();
	delete o;
}
```

- Virtual means this function can be overridden/redefined in subsequent derived classes, and the appropriate version will be invoked through a polymorphic object. The derived class has a function with the same name and the same type of arguments in the derived class.

- In our main program, we create an instance of a MyDerivedClass class through a base class pointer. Using the arrow operator `->`, we invoke the appropriate version of the function. 
- The `->` (arrow) operator does two things: it dereferences a pointer to an object and accesses the member of a class. Here, the o object morphs into different types to invoke the appropriate function. Here, it invokes the derived version. That is why the concept is called ***polymorphism***.
- If there were no `dowork()` function in the derived class, it would invoke the base class version.

- Functions can be ***pure virtual*** by specifying the `= 0;` at the end of the function declaration. Pure virtual functions do not have definitions and are also called ***interfaces***.
- Pure virtual functions must be redefined in the derived class. Classes having at least one pure virtual function are called ***abstract classes*** and cannot be instantiated. They can only be used as base classes.

- One important thing to add is that a base class must have a virtual destructor if it is to be used in a polymorphic scenario. This ensures the proper deallocation of objects accessed through a base class pointer via the inheritance chain:
```cpp
class MyBaseClass{
public:
	virtual void dowork() = 0;
	virtual ~MyBaseClass() {};
};
```

- So, the three pillars of object-oriented programming are
	- Encapsulation
	- Inheritance
	- Polymorphism

- ***Encapsulation*** is grouping the fields into different visibility zones, hiding implementation from the user, and exposing the interface, for example.
- ***Inheritance*** is a mechanism where we can create classes by inheriting from a base class. Inheritance creates a certain class hierarchy and relationship between them.
- ***Polymorphism*** is an ability of an object to morph into different types during runtime, ensuring the proper function is invoked. This is achieved through inheritance, virtual and overridden functions, and base and derived class pointers.