# 29. Enumerations

- Enumeration, or `enum` for short, is a type whose values are symbolic, user-defined, named constants called ***enumerators***.

- There are two kinds of enums: the ***unscoped enums*** and ***scoped enums***. 

- The unscoped `enum` type can be defined with
```cpp
enum MyEnum
{
	myfirstvalue,
	mysecondvalue,
	mythirdvalue
};
```

- To declare a variable of enumeration type MyEnum, we write
```cpp
enum MyEnum
{
	myfirstvalue,
	mysecondvalue,
	mythirdvalue
};

int main(){
	MyEnum myenum = myfirstvalue;
	myenum = mysecondvalue; // we can change the value of our enum object
}
```

- Each enumerator has a value of the underlying type. We can change those:
```cpp
enum MyEnum{
	myfirstvalue = 10,
	mysecondvalue,
	mythirdvalue
};
```

- These unscoped enums have their enumerators leak into an outside scope, the scope in which the `enum` type itself is defined. Old enums are best avoided. Prefer scoped enums to unscoped enums, as scoped enums do not leak their enumerators into an outer scope and are not implicitly convertible to other types. 
- To define a scoped `enum`, we write:
```cpp
enum class MyEnum{
	myfirstvalue,
	mysecondvalue,
	mythirdvalue
};
```

- To declare a variable of type `enum` class (scoped enum), we write
```cpp
enum class MyEnum{
	myfirstvalue,
	mysecondvalue,
	mythirdvalue
};

int main(){
	MyEnum myenum = MyEnum::myfirstvalue;
}
```

- To access an enumerator value, we prepend the enumerator with the `enum` name and a scope resolution operator `::` such as `MyEnum::myfirstvalue`, `MyEnum::mysecondvalue`, etc.

- With these enums, the enumerator names are defined only within the enum’s internal scope and do not implicitly convert to underlying types. We can specify the underlying type for the scoped enum:
```cpp
enum class MyCharEnum : char{
	myfirstvalue,
	mysecondvalue,
	mythirdvalue
};
```

- We can also change the initial underlying values of enumerators by specifying the value:
```cpp
enum class MyEnum{
	myfirstvalue = 15,
	mysecondvalue,
	mythirdvalue = 30
};
```

- Prefer enum class enumerations (scoped enums) to old, plain, unscoped enums. Use enumerations to represent states, for example, when our object can have one value out of a set of predefined named values.