# 31. Organizing Code

- We can split our C++ code into multiple files. By convention, there are two kinds of files into which we can store our C++ source: ***header files*** (headers) and ***source files.***

## Header and Source Files

- Header files are source code files where we usually put various declarations. Heade files usually have the `.h` (or `.hpp`) extension.
- Source files are files where we can store our definitions and the main program. They usually have the `.cpp` (or `.cc`) extension.

- Then we include the header files into our source files using the `#include `preprocessor directive.
- To include a standard library header, we use the `#include` statement followed by a header name without an extension, enclosed in angled brackets such as `<headername>`
- To include user-defined header files, we use the `#include` statement, followed by a full header name with an extension enclosed in double quotes. Example:
```cpp
#include "myheader.h"
#include "otherheader.h"
// etc
```

- The compiler stitches the code from the header file and the source file together and produces what is called a ***translation unit***. 
- The compiler then uses this file to create an ***object file***. A ***linker*** then links object files together to create an executable program or a library.

- We should put the declarations and constants into header files and put definitions and executable code in source files.
## Header Guards

- Multiple source files might include the same header file. We use a mechanism called ***header guards*** to ensure that our header is included only once in the compilation process. It ensures that our header content is included only once in the compilation process. We surround the code in our header file with the following macros:
```cpp
#ifndef MY_HEADER_H
#define MY_HEADER_H
// header file source code
// goes here
#endif
```

- This approach ensures the code inside a header file is included only once during the compilation phase.
## Namespaces

- So far, we have seen how to group parts of our C++ code into headers and source files. There is another way we can logically group parts of our C++ source code, and that is through namespaces. A namespace is a scope with a name. 
- To declare a namespace, we write
```cpp
namespace MyNameSpace
{
}
```

- To refer to these objects outside the namespace, we use their fully qualified names. This means we use the `namespace_name::our_object` notation. 
- To introduce an entire namespace into the current scope, we can use the `using` directive.

- If we have several separate namespaces with the same name in our code, we are extending that namespace, we are not redefining it.

- A namespace can be spread across multiple files, both headers and source files. We will often see production code wrapped into namespaces. It is an excellent mechanism to group the code into namespaces logically.

- Two namespaces with different names can hold an object with the same name. Since every namespace is a different scope, they now declare two different, unrelated objects with the same name. It prevents name clashes.