# 33. Conversions

- Types can be converted to other types. For example, built-in types can be converted to other built-in types. Here, we will discuss the implicit and explicit conversions.
## Implicit Conversions

- Some values can be implicitly converted into each other. This is true for all the built-in types. We can convert char to int, int to double, etc.
- Example:
```cpp
int main(){
	char mychar = 64;
	int myint = 123;
	double mydouble = 456.789;
	bool myboolean = true;

	myint = mychar;
	mydouble = myint;
	mychar = myboolean;
}
```

- We can also implicitly convert `double` to `int`. However, some information is lost, and the compiler will warn us about this because the decimal part is lost. This is called ***narrowing conversions***.

- When smaller integer types such as `char` or `short` are used in arithmetic operations, they get promoted/converted to integers. This is referred to as ***integral promotion***.
- For example, if we use two chars in an arithmetic operation, both get converted to an integer, and the whole expression is of type `int`. This conversion happens only inside the arithmetic expression.

- Any built-in type can be converted to a boolean. For objects of those types, any value other than zero gets converted to a boolean value of `true`, and values equal to zero implicitly convert to a value of `false`.

- Conversely, a boolean type can be converted to `int`. The value of true converts to an integer value of one, and the value of false converts to an integer value of zero. A pointer of any type can be converted to `void*` type.

- While we can convert any data pointer to a void pointer, we cannot dereference the `void` pointer. To be able to access the object pointed to by a void pointer, we need to cast the void pointer to some other pointer type first. 
-  To do that, we can use the explicit cast function `static_cast`.

-  Arrays are implicitly convertible to pointers. When we assign an array name to the pointer, the pointer points at the first element in an array.
- Arrays are implicitly convertible to pointers. When we assign an array name to the pointer, the pointer points at the first element in an array.

- It is important to adopt the following: in modern C++, we prefer `std::vector` and `std::array` containers to raw arrays and pointers.
## Explicit Conversions

- We can explicitly convert the value of one type to another. Let us start with the `static_cast` function. This function converts between implicitly convertible types. 
- A signature of the function is
```cpp
static_cast<type_to_convert_to>(value_to_convert_from)
```

- If we want to convert from a `double` to an `int`, we write
```cpp
int main(){
	auto myinteger = static_cast<int>(123.456);
}
```

- Prefer this verbose function to implicit conversions, as the `static_cast` is the idiomatic way of converting between convertible types. This function performs a compile-time conversion.

- The following explicit conversion functions should be used **rarely** and carefully.
- They are `dynamic_cast` and `reinterpret_cast`. 
- The `dynamic_cast` function converts pointers of the base class to pointers to the derived class and vice versa up the inheritance chain. 
- If the conversion succeeds, the result is a pointer to a base or derived class, depending on our use case. If the conversion cannot be done, the result is a pointer of value `nullptr`.

- To use this function, our class must be polymorphic, which means our base class should have at least one virtual function.
-  The `dynamic_cast` can only convert between related classes inside the inheritance chain. 
- In reality, we would hardly ever have to use `dynamic_cast` in the real world.

- The third and most dangerous cast is `reinterpret_cast`.
- This one is best avoided as it does not offer guarantees of any kind. With that in mind, we will skip its description and move on to the next chapter.

- ***Important***: The `static_cast` function is probably the only cast we will be using most of the time.