# 35. Smart Pointers

- Smart pointers are pointers that own the object they point to and automatically destroy the object they point to and deallocate the memory once the pointers go out of scope. This way, we do not have to manually delete the object, which was the case with the `new` and `delete` operators.
- Smart pointers are declared in the `<memory>` header. We will cover the following smart pointers – unique and shared.
## Unique Pointer

- A unique pointer called `std::unique_ptr` is a pointer that owns an object it points to. The pointer cannot be copied. A unique pointer deletes the object and deallocates memory for it once it goes out of scope.

- To declare a unique pointer to a simple `int` object, we write
```cpp
#include <iostream>
#include <memory>

int main(){
	std::unique_ptr<int> p(new int{ 123 });
	std::cout << *p;
}
```

- This example creates a pointer to an object of type int and assigns a value of `123` to the object. A unique pointer can be dereferenced in the same way as a regular pointer using the `*p` notation. The object gets deleted once `p` goes out of scope. No explicit use of the `delete` operator is required.

- A better way to initialize a unique pointer is through a `std::make_unique<some_type>(some_value)` function, where we specify the type for the object in angle brackets and the value for the object the pointer points at in parentheses:
```cpp
#include <iostream>
#include <memory>

int main(){
	std::unique_ptr<int> p = std::make_unique<int>(123);
	std::cout << *p;
}
```

- **Note:** The `std::make_unique` function was introduced in the C++14 standard. Make sure to compile with the `-std=c++14` flag to be able to use this function.

- We can create a unique pointer that points to an object of a class and then use its `->` operator to access object members:
```cpp
#include <iostream>
#include <memory>
class MyClass{
public:
	void printmessage(){
		std::cout << "Hello from a class.";
	}
};

int main(){
	std::unique_ptr<MyClass> p = std::make_unique<MyClass>();
	p->printmessage();
}
```
## Shared Pointer

- We can have multiple pointers point to a single object. We can say that all of them own our pointed-to object. That is, our object has ***shared ownership***.
- And our pointed-to object gets deleted only when the last of those pointers get destroyed. This is what a shared pointer is for. Multiple pointers point to a single object, and when all of them get out of scope, the object gets destroyed.

- A shared pointer is defined as `std::shared_ptr<some_type>`. It can be initialized using the `std::make_shared<some_type>(some_value)` function. 
- Shared pointers can be copied. To have three shared pointers pointing at the same object, we can write
```cpp
#include <iostream>
#include <memory>

int main(){
	std::shared_ptr<int> p1 = std::make_shared<int>(123);
	std::shared_ptr<int> p2 = p1;
	std::shared_ptr<int> p3 = p1;
	
	std::cout << "Shared pointer 1 points at: " << *p1 << '\n';
	std::cout << "Shared pointer 2 points at: " << *p2 << '\n';
	std::cout << "Shared pointer 3 points at: " << *p3 << '\n';
}
```

- When all pointers get out of scope, the pointed-to object gets destroyed, and the memory for it gets deallocated.
- The main differences between unique and shared pointers are
	- With unique pointers, we have one pointer pointing at and owning a single object, whereas with shared pointers, we have multiple pointers pointing at and owning a single object.
	- Unique pointers cannot be copied, whereas shared pointers can.

- If you wonder which one to use, let us say that 90% of the time, you will be using the unique pointer. Shared pointers can be used to represent data structures such as graphs.
- Smart pointers are class templates themselves, meaning they have member functions. We will just briefly mention they can also accept custom deleters, a code that gets executed when they get out of scope.