# 5. Types

- Every entity has a type. What is a type? A ***type*** is a property describing the set of possible values and operations on those values. 
- Instances of types are called ***objects***.
- An ***object*** is a region in memory that has a type, a value, and possibly a name.
- An instance of a simple type is not to be confused with an instance of a class which is also called an ***object***.
## Fundamental Types

- C++ has some built-in types. We often refer to them as fundamental types. 
- A ***declaration*** is a statement that introduces a name into a current scope.
### Boolean

- This type holds values of `true` and `false`.

- ***Note***: All local variables should be initialized. Accessing uninitialized variables results in undefined behaviour, abbreviated as UB.
### Character Type

- Type `char`, referred to as character type, is used to represent a single character. The type can store characters such as 'a', 'Z', etc. 
- The size of a character type is exactly one byte.
- Character literals are enclosed in single quotes '' in C++.

- There are other character types, such as `wchar_t` for holding characters of Unicode character set and `char16_t` for holding UTF-16 character sets.

- Every character is represented by an integer number in the character set. That is why we can assign both numeric literals (up to a certain number) and character literals to our char variable.
### Integer Types

- Another fundamental type is `int` called integer type. We use it to store integral values (whole numbers), both negative and positive.
- Integer literals can be decimal, octal, and hexadecimal. Octal literals start with a prefix of `0`, and hexadecimal literals begin with a prefix of `0x`.
### Floating-Point Types
 
 - There are three floating-point types in C++: `float`, `double`, and `long double`.
 - They are used for storing floating-point values/real numbers.

### Type void

- Type `void` is a type with no values. 
- Well, what is the purpose of such a type if we cannot have objects of that type? Good question. While we cannot have objects of type `void`, we can have functions of type `void` – functions that do not return a value. We can also have a void pointer type marked with `void*`. 

### Type Modifiers

- Types can have modifiers. Some of the modifiers are `signed` and `unsigned`.
- The `signed` (the default if omitted) means the type can hold both positive and negative values, and `unsigned` means the type has unsigned representation. 
- Other modifiers affect the type’s size: `short` means the type will have a width of at least 16 bits, and `long` means the type will have a width of at least 32 bits.

### Variable Declaration, Definition, and Initialization

- Introducing a name into a current scope is called a ***declaration***. We are letting the world know there is a name (a variable, for example) of some type from now on in the current scope. In a declaration, we prepend the variable name with a type name.

- If there is an initializer for an object present, then we call it an ***initialization***. We are declaring and initializing an object to a specific value. We can initialize an object in various ways:
```cpp
int main()
{
	int x = 123;
	int y{ 123 };
	int z = { 123 };
}
```

- A variable ***definition*** is setting a value in memory for a name. The ***definition*** is making sure we can access and use the name in our program. Roughly speaking, it is a declaration followed by an ***initialization*** (for variables) followed by a semicolon. The definition is also a declaration.