# 7. Operators

## Assignment Operator

- The assignment operator `=` assigns a value to a variable/object.
## Arithmetic Operators

- We can do arithmetic operations using arithmetic operators. Some of them are
	- `+`     // addition
	- `-`     // subtraction
	- `*`     // multiplication
	- `/`     // division
	- `%`   // modulo

- The result of ***integral division*** where both operands are integers is ***truncated toward zeros***.
- If you want a floating-point result, you need to use the type `double` and make sure at least one of the division operands is also of type `double`.
## Compound Assignment Operators

- Compound assignment operators allow us to perform an arithmetic operation and assign a result with one operator:
	- `+=`     // compound addition
	- `-=`      // compound subtraction
	- `*=`     // compound multiplication
	- `/=`     // compound division
	- `%=`     // compound modulo
## Increment/Decrement Operators

- Increment/decrement operators increment/decrement the value of the object. The operators are:
	- `++x`        // pre-increment operator
	- `x++`       // post-increment operator
	- `--x`        // pre-decrement operator
	- `x--`       // post-decrement operator

- Both pre-increment and post-ncrement operators add 1 to the value of our object, and both pre-decrement and post-decrement operators subtract one from the value of our object. 
- The difference between the two, apart from the implementation mechanism, is that with the pre-increment operator, a value of 1 is added first, and then the variable/object is evaluated/accessed in the expression. With the post-increment, the object is evaluated/accessed first, and after that, the value of 1 is added. To the next statement that follows, it does not make a difference. The value of the object is the same, no matter what version of the operator was used. The only difference is the timing in the expression where it is used.