# 1. The Rise and Fall of Pseudo-Productivity

## What Does “Productivity” Mean?

- ***“doing what you said you would do.”***

- The key idea was to measure the amount of output produced for a given amount of input and then experiment with different processes for improving this value.
- The old notions of productivity that worked so well in farming and manufacturing didn’t seem to apply to this new style of cognitive work. One problem is the variability of effort.

- In knowledge work, by contrast, individuals are often wrangling complicated and constantly shifting workloads.

- ***“The knowledge worker cannot be supervised closely or in detail. He can only be helped. But he must direct himself.”***

- The more activity you see, the more you can assume that I’m contributing to the organization’s bottom line. Similarly, the busier I am as a freelancer or entrepreneur, the more I can be assured I’m doing all I can to get after it.

- In the absence of more sophisticated measures of effectiveness, we also gravitate away from deeper efforts toward shallower, more concrete tasks that can be more easily checked off a to-do list. Long work sessions that don’t immediately produce obvious contrails of effort become a source of anxiety – it’s safer to chime in on email threads and “jump on” calls than to put your head down and create a bold new strategy.

> ***Pseudo-Productivity*** - The use of visible activity as the primary means of approximating actual productive effort. 
## Why Are We So Exhausted?

- In a setting where activity provides a proxy for productivity, the introduction of tools like email (and, later, Slack) that make it possible to visibly signal your busyness with minimal effort inevitably led to more and more of the average knowledge worker’s day being dedicated to talking about work, as fast and frantically as possible, through incessant electronic messaging.

- Computers and networks opened many new possibilities, but when combined with pseudo-productivity they ended up supercharging our sense of overload and distraction, pushing us onto a collision course with the burnout crisis that afflicts us today. 

- It seems like the benefits of technology have created the ability to stack more into our day and onto our schedules than we have the capacity to handle while maintaining a level of quality which makes the things worth doing... I think that’s where the burnout really hurts – when you want to care about something but you’re removed from the capacity to do the thing or do it properly and give it your passion and full attention and creativity because you’re expected to do so many other things.